Melissa Caddick: Death of Australian fraudster remains a mystery

When conwoman Melissa Caddick vanished from her luxurious eastern Sydney home in November 2020 - with only her partially decomposed foot found washed up on a beach months later - it set off a frenzy in Australia.

The case blindsided investors, baffled police, and captured the imagination of a nation.

The fraudster has inspired a hit podcast, a TV dramatisation, and countless outlandish theories - including that she had been swallowed by a shark or had severed her own foot to throw police off her scent.

A long-running inquest into the case heard of a flawed police investigation, conflicting accounts from her husband, and all the extensive speculation surrounding her fate.

But a coroner on Thursday ruled that exactly what happened to her would remain a mystery.

"The conclusion I have reached is that Melissa Caddick is deceased. However... I do not consider the evidence enables a positive finding as to how she died, or when and where this happened," Deputy State Coroner Elizabeth Ryan wrote.

The final morning

For most, the Melissa Caddick story began with the news that the seemingly successful financial adviser was missing.

But her life had actually begun to unravel months earlier when Australia's financial watchdog was tipped off that she had been using a friend's financial adviser's licence, having simply pasted in her own name on the document.

Regulators suspect the 49-year-old stole up to $30m (£15.8m; $19.5m) from more than 60 clients, including many of her family and friends, to help fund a lavish lifestyle.

There were overseas trips on private jets, high-end cars, designer clothes, and expensive jewellery.

Her methods were not "particularly complicated", the coroner said.

As new clients gave her money to invest, she would pay some out as dividends to existing clients before keeping - and spending - the rest.

Coroner Ryan said she was struck by the "powerful impression of wealth and success" Caddick made on her clients and would-be investors.

"Equally significant was the trust they had in her... almost all were either immediate family members, or close personal friends of herself and her family," she said.

One would-be investor recalled: "I wanted to model myself and our family on successful people, and Melissa appeared to be successful".

But everything fell apart on 11 November 2020 when police knocked on her door at dawn.

Conflicting accounts

The last confirmed sighting of Melissa Caddick was by officers at the raid on her home.

Her husband, Anthony Koletti, told police they believed she had gone for an early run the next morning. Her car and all her personal belongings had been left behind.

But she was not reported missing by Mr Koletti for more than 30 hours, and only after he had dialled in to a court hearing that she was due to attend and appeared surprised she had not turned up.

Police initially explored two theories - that Caddick was still alive and had gone into hiding to escape justice, or had taken her own life.

But the inquest heard how Mr Koletti, a hairdresser and part-time DJ, behaved erratically in the wake of his wife's disappearance, leading police to suspect he could be involved.

Mr Koletti has denied any knowledge of his wife's crimes or any involvement in her disappearance, and police say they have uncovered no evidence to dispute that.

But an investigator told the coroner's court Mr Koletti "didn't appear to be overly concerned" when his wife vanished.

Lead Detective Sergeant Michael Kyneur also said Mr Koletti had visited a cliff top area near their home and taken a photograph of a shoe print, an action the policeman described as "extraordinary".

"That's a dog park. It's like saying I found a footprint on Bondi beach."

The inquest also heard that Mr Koletti had sent texts from Caddick's phone pretending to be her, told police he was "too busy" to attend an interview, and gave conflicting versions of events.

For example, he was able to provide a description of what his wife was wearing on the morning she vanished, despite also saying he had not actually seen her, police said.

Mr Koletti had also recounted his version of events by releasing a musical concept album containing tracks with titles such as "Melissa Is Missing" and "Above the Law".

It was "regrettable" that Mr Koletti had not given a "full and frank" account of what had happened, Magistrate Ryan said on Thursday.

Investigation criticised

The case took a grisly twist in February 2021 with the discovery of a rotting, trainer-clad foot on a remote beach 500km (310 miles) south of Sydney.

Experts matched the body part to Caddick through DNA, but an autopsy couldn't determine if it was separated by force or decomposition.

The inquest heard a slew of theories to explain how it ended at Bournda Beach, including that a shark ate and later regurgitated body parts.

Police even considered throwing pig carcasses with running shoes on their trotters into the sea to determine how shark behaviour or ocean currents could have played a role, the inquest heard.

An orthopaedic surgeon told the inquest it was unlikely Caddick could have severed her own foot, as it would require "significant force" to cut through bone, cause major blood loss, and require specialist post-surgical care.

But scientists put forward a simple explanation at the inquest.

Oceanographers said currents could have easily carried the foot that distance, while a pathologist described how human feet can detach from bodies during decomposition.

The inquest also heard criticism of police handling of the case.

Officers assigned to the Caddick case stuck too closely to their view that she had voluntarily vanished, some said.

A crime scene examination of the house was not done until 19 days after Caddick disappeared, and a lawyer assisting the coroner questioned why the homicide squad wasn't brought in immediately, if only to rule out foul play.

Another detective expressed surprise that NSW Police only sought out the corporate watchdog's affidavit on Caddick - which outlined its case against her - some months after her disappearance.

The inquest was also told that Caddick had a life insurance policy, which included suicide cover, and had made a number of references to ending her life over the years - but police initially devoted limited resources to this line of inquiry.

Magistrate Ryan on Thursday said the uncovering of Caddick's deception may have triggered a "narcissistic injury", with the illusion of her wealth and success shattered.

"The Asic investigation and search warrant very likely caused her a catastrophic level of shame and despair," she said.

"She may well have reached the conclusion that ending her life was the only option."

But the manner of her death will ultimately remain unresolved, she said.

Equally unresolved are the losses of her clients, many of whom saw huge sums of money vanish.

"I sold my business as I was under the impression my money was safe, and I retired in 2017," one victim testified.

"To rub more salt in the wound she has also stolen my mother's money, wife's, mother-in-law, son, brother and sister… wiping out three generations of my family's savings."

Germany, where car is king but protesters won’t let you drive

When does peaceful protest become a crime? How much disruption can a society handle? Do the rights of peaceful demonstrators outweigh the needs of ambulances, fire engines or commuters?

Those are the questions being fiercely debated in Germany on Thursday morning, after the homes of Last Generation environmental activists were raided by police early Wednesday.

Last Generation's spokeswoman said about 25 police officers carrying guns stormed her bedroom while she was in bed, breaking down the door of her apartment in the Berlin district of Kreuzberg.

"We don't know what they were looking for," said one activist, "we only have glue and high-vis jackets."

But that is enough to inflame a culture war that has the car parked right at its heart.

The popular tabloid cliché portrays sausage-eating, car-driving German traditionalists being bossed around by moralistic young vegans.

Mainstream Germany is, as ever, more nuanced. But the extremes on both sides appear to be getting more radical.

Videos on social media regularly show angry drivers shouting at and sometimes attacking activists.

It might seem surprising that the discussion over climate is so fierce in Germany.

After all, this is a country with the Green Party in government, with effective recycling, widespread bike use and heavily subsidised public transport. The government not only has ambitious legally binding climate targets, but also, unlike the UK, concrete policies to reach them.

But Germany is also a country with a powerful auto industry, where the car is often king. Debates over pedestrianising roads turn into tortuous political battles lasting years.

The recent Berlin regional election was partly fought between a conservative campaign for more rights for drivers and Green demands for better bike paths. The conservatives won.

Rows regularly blow up between two of the parties in Germany's three-way governing coalition: the Greens and the liberal pro-car pro-business FDP, which views driving a Porsche without a speed limit on the motorway as a fundamental liberal right.

Both parties are struggling in the polls, making them even more desperate to fight for their ideological values. Social Democrat Chancellor Olaf Scholz's contribution to the debate this week was to describe the actions of Last Generation as "completely crazy".

The same issues are being discussed in the UK. But the environmentalists disrupting transport to highlight the climate emergency are part of a different group; Just Stop Oil.

The tactics of both groups are similar.

Last Generation activists glue themselves to roads or vehicles to block traffic as a way of highlighting climate change.

Over the past month, German activists have focused on Berlin: on Tuesday, at least five separate roads were blocked, as well as the main motorway around the city - twice.

Both organisations also stage high-profile stunts involving artwork: Just Stop Oil protesters have thrown soup at Van Gogh's Sunflowers, while Last Generation activists threw mashed potatoes at a Monet painting.

But their concrete demands are different.

Just Stop Oil's targets are big-picture, including an end to fossil fuels and more renewable energy. Last Generation has specific aims which, compared to their radical actions, seem modest and technocratic: a 100 km/h speed limit on motorways; a €9 (£7.80) public transport monthly ticket; a citizens' council to plan how to scrap fossil fuels by 2030.

Activists say they are offering concrete suggestions and want to talk to political leaders. In some German cities, mayors negotiate with Last Generation activists in return for an end to protests.

But the big difference between the two countries is the legal and political environment.

Germany's 20th-Century experience of Nazi and communist dictatorship means that the right to protest is sacrosanct.

In the UK, two Just Stop Oil activists were jailed for up to three years for scaling the Dartford Crossing bridge and unfurling a banner, which then led to traffic delays.

The British government's new Public Order Act gives police more powers to crack down on climate protests, with heavier penalties and actions that would not legally be possible in Germany.

In Germany, activists who block roads typically receive fines. But in March, for the first time, Last Generation activists were handed a prison sentence which was not suspended.

Two men received sentences of a few months for repeatedly gluing themselves to roads and blocking traffic. The sentence sparked outrage among civil rights campaigners. Wednesday's police raids have made the debate even more ferocious.

On Thursday Conservative politicians and many newspaper commentators applauded Wednesday's police raids on activists.

The Cologne daily, the Kölner Stadt-Anzeiger, called Last Generation's actions "blackmail" and said the activists should win people over, rather than punish them for the government's mistakes.

Left-wing politicians and voters accuse the police of being heavy-handed. They say an organisation with the same aims as the government cannot be called criminal.

"Why are cannons being used to shoot sparrows?" asks the Reutlinger General-Anzeiger.

This week activists have been taking to the streets in protest, saying police actions will simply galvanise support. Critics meanwhile are demanding more powers for the police.

Instead of calming tensions, the raids may make both sides more radical.

Ukraine war: Jet pilots talk about the air war with Russia

"A launch has been detected. Manoeuvre!"

The order of the Ukrainian ground team is clear - a Russian Su-35 fighter jet has fired a missile at Silk's aircraft. He knows he has to abort the mission in order to survive.

Silk, which is the pilot's callsign, quickly dives his MiG-29 so low that he can see the treetops. The old Soviet-era aircraft starts trembling as it is pushed to the limit. Silk navigates through towers and hills that he studied meticulously on the map while preparing for this mission.

"Such flights close to the surface are the most difficult ones," says Silk. "You have to concentrate very hard. And because of the low height, you don't have the time or the space for a safe ejection."

Fighter jets like the one flown by Silk accompany Ukrainian ground attack aircraft during their combat missions at the front line. Silk's job is to provide cover from Russian air-to-air missiles. But there is not much Ukrainian jets can do to stop them.

"Our biggest enemy is Russian Su-35 fighter jets," says another MiG-29 pilot with the call sign Juice.

"We know positions of [Russian] air defence, we know their ranges. It's quite predictable, so we can calculate how long we can stay [inside their zone]. But in the case of fighter jets, they are mobile. They have a good air picture and they know when we're flying to the front lines."

Russian air patrols can detect a jet's take-off deep inside the territory of Ukraine. Their R-37M missiles can hit an aerial target at a distance of 150-200km (93-124 miles), whereas Ukrainian rockets can only travel up to 50km (31 miles).

So, Russian planes can see Ukrainian aircraft and shoot them down long before they pose any threat.

Since the start of the Russian invasion, the Ukrainian Air Force has suffered serious losses - although they don't reveal specific figures.

Russia's claim that they've destroyed more than 400 Ukrainian planes doesn't seem plausible, given independent estimates of the Ukrainian fleet's size are at least half that number.

The IISS Military Balance 2022 report states that the Ukrainian Air Force had 124 combat-capable aircraft before the full-scale Russian invasion.

To end Russia's superiority in the air, Ukraine wants its Western partners to provide more modern jets like the US-made F-16.

"Our pilots fly on a knife's edge," says Col Volodymyr Lohachov, the head of aviation development department of the Ukrainian Air Force. "But F-16 jets would allow us to operate beyond the enemy's air defence systems."

And their missiles can be effective up to 150km, which will enable them to attack Russian jets as well.

"Of course, we will still be targeted," says Juice. "But it will be an equal fight. Right now, we don't have any response to them."

F-16s have better radars that can detect missiles fired at them. Currently, the team that monitors ground radars must verbally communicate with pilots about threats they face.

"Our jets don't have a system to warn about [Russian rocket] launches," says a pilot of an Su-25 attack jet with the call sign Pumba. "It's all visual-based. If you see them, then you just try to escape by firing off heat traps and manoeuvring."

Russia's air superiority means that Ukraine can afford only a limited deployment of its military aviation close to the front line, which can have a major impact on the success of any future counter-offensive operations. According to Juice, they carry out up to 20 times fewer sorties than the Russian Air Force.

And the weapons Ukrainian attack aircraft have are from the stock of old Soviet-era bombs and unguided rockets, which are quickly depleting because of limited supplies.

But it's not just air support for ground troops. Western jets can also enhance Ukraine's air defence systems, aviators say.

"Our aircraft have old radars that don't see [Russian] cruise missiles. We are like blind cats when we try to shoot them down," Col Lohachov explains.

The range of western weapons on F-16s will allow them to intercept cruise missiles "on long distances right on our borders, instead of trying to catch them somewhere in central parts of Ukraine," says Juice.

The MiG-29 jets that Poland and Slovakia have transferred to Ukraine recently do not solve their main problems, Ukrainian pilots say. Those planes have the same old weapons and limited capacity as the Ukrainian fleet.

But the US administration has ruled out sending F-16 jets to Ukraine. Many are concerned that providing Ukraine with Western aircraft can only escalate the conflict, drawing the US and Europe directly into the war.

And even training Ukrainian pilots to fly these planes has not been approved. In fact, Colin Kahl, the Pentagon's undersecretary of defence for policy, said that even "the most expeditious timeline" for delivering F-16s would be 18 months, and thus there was no sense training pilots early.

However, Ukrainian officials are hoping to get these jets from European countries, which would still require the US's consent, but would be much quicker to deliver.

As for training pilots, "we can afford to send only a certain number of people for a limited period at any given time. We must avoid reducing our military capabilities here," says Col Lohachov.

So the best option, he adds, is to start sending small groups now in order to have enough trained pilots when planes arrive.

It is clear, however, that these jets will not be delivered in time for Ukraine's expected counter-offensive. President Volodymyr Zelensky has already announced that this operation will go ahead without waiting for Western aircraft.

Some experts question the impact F-16s could have in this war.

Prof Justin Bronk, Senior Research Fellow at the Royal United Service Institute (RUSI), says that these jets would provide an extra layer of defence but "wouldn't turn the war around on their own".

Even with F-16 jets, "Ukrainian pilots would still have to fly very low anywhere near the front lines because of Russia's ground-based threat and that would limit effective missile range," Prof Bronk explains. "And it also means employing air power in the way the West did in wars like Iraq, Libya, Afghanistan, isn't possible in Ukraine."

Logistical challenges raise questions about whether it's worth the effort to send F-16s to Ukraine. It's not just about training pilots and mechanics - the infrastructure must be upgraded as well.

F-16s are designed for very smooth and long runways. Ukraine will have to adapt its current airfields to meet those requirements - resurface them, clean them and extend them.

"But doing that will be visible to the Russians from space and through human intelligence sources," Prof Bronk argues. "And if you only do one or two bases, and then try to set up ground support to operate F-15s or F-16s, then Russians will see it and they will strike it.

"So, you would have to do lots of them. Then you're into the question - is that worth the number of skilled personnel and the amount of political effort and logistical support that could otherwise be used for other things like tanks and artillery, or ground-based air defence systems?"

For now, Ukrainian pilots like Pumba, Silk and Juice will have to rely on their old Soviet-era fighters and attack jets.

When an alarm signals a new combat mission, they rush towards their aircraft. They give the thumbs up to mechanics to confirm that all systems on board are working.

Some of them have flown more than 100 combat missions. But they know that each flight could be their last.

Ukraine war: Inside the fight for the last streets of Bakhmut

In a bunker just outside the city limits of Bakhmut, Ukraine's 77th Brigade direct artillery fire to support their infantry - their last line of defence on the western edge of the city.

Ukraine is still clinging to the last few streets here.

But the live video feed the artillery gunners watch intently, from a drone flying above the city, suggests that even if Russia can finally wrestle control, it would be little more than a pyrrhic victory.

The prize is now a crumpled, skeletal city - with hardly a building left unscathed, and with its entire population vanished.

The battle for the eastern Ukrainian city of Bakhmut has been the longest and bloodiest of this war so far. Western officials estimate between 20,000 and 30,000 Russian troops have been killed or wounded here, while Ukraine's military has also paid a heavy price - and it still isn't over.

The plumes of smoke still hang heavy over the besieged city, accompanied by the relentless rumble of artillery fire.

Russia has been trying to capture Bakhmut for months, and it's been a testament - so far - to Ukraine's determination not to give ground. But it's also a reminder that its coming counteroffensive could prove far more challenging.

Back in the bunker, Ukraine's 77th Brigade orders another artillery strike on a house. Seconds later a plume of smoke rises from the rubble. Two men emerge from the smoke, stumbling down a street. One appears to be injured.

I ask if they're Wagner soldiers - the Russian paramilitary force which has been leading the assault. "Yes," replies Myroslav, one of the Ukrainian troops staring at the screen.

"They are fighting quite well, but they don't really care about their people," he says.

He adds that they don't seem to have much artillery support and they just advance in the hope that they'll be "luckier than the last time". His comrade, Mykola, interjects: "They just walk towards us, they must be on drugs."

Looking at this shell of a city it's hard to understand why either side has sacrificed so many lives for it.

Mykola admits that the defence has also been costly for Ukraine. He says many soldiers have given their lives, and it's hard to fight in the densely packed streets. He says they've been replaced by troops with less experience, but adds: "They will become the same warriors as those who fought before them."

To the south of the city, Ukraine's 28th Brigade has been helping prevent Bakhmut from being encircled.

The Wagner forces they once faced have already been replaced by paratroopers of Russia's VDV, or airborne forces. But they're still locked in daily skirmishes.

During a lull in the fighting, Yevhen, a 29-year-old soldier, takes us on a tour of their defensive position in a small wood.

The arrival of spring has provided them with some leaves for cover, but many of the trees have been stripped by the constant shelling.

As we run from a trench, across exposed ground pock-marked by shell holes, the Russians open fire with their mortars. "That was pretty damn close," says Yevhen in perfect English as we reach some cover.

As we move to another position he says: "Now we're going to fire back."

Minutes later his men follow up with a volley of small arms fire and rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs). There are no casualties this time. But hours after we leave one of their soldiers is seriously injured.

President Volodymyr Zelensky has called Bakhmut "a fortress" of Ukrainian morale. Yevhen displays that determination not to give up. "The whole point of Bakhmut is to keep the enemy there," he says.

If Ukraine gave up Bakhmut, he says, they'd only lose more lives later. "We could retreat to save a few lives, but we would then have to counter-attack and we'd lose even more".

Ukraine's hope is that the fight over Bakhmut has blunted Russia's ability to conduct its own offensive operations, and exhausted its army and supplies.

But Russia has also been preparing to stymie Ukraine's upcoming offensive.

Recent satellite images of the occupied south show it has built hundreds of miles of deep trench lines and dragon's teeth tank traps to slow down any attempted advance. More difficult to punch through than the razor wire and mines we saw in front of these Ukrainian positions.

Southern Ukraine is where many expect the focus of the Ukrainian offensive to be. Russia has already ordered a partial evacuation near the nuclear power plant at Zaporizhzhia.

Ukraine, too, has been rationing artillery rounds in preparation for an attack that will be spearheaded by newly trained brigades of troops and some of the 1,300 armoured vehicles and 230 tanks supplied by the West. Though we have also witnessed convoys of Western military equipment heading East.

Meanwhile, Ukraine's Defence Minister Oleksii Reznikov has tried to dampen down expectations - warning against "overestimating" the outcome.

I ask Yevhen if he feels that pressure too. He says he knows it won't be easy, but adds: "We've already changed the whole world's opinion of the Ukrainian army and we still have lots of surprises."

But this time it may prove harder to conceal the element of surprise.

Roe v Wade: Abortion pills a new front in culture wars

As a crowd assembled outside the United States Supreme Court, waiting for its landmark abortion ruling last month, Kristan Hawkins stood front and centre.

She held a microphone in her left hand and a sign in her right. "I am the post-Roe generation," it said, a signature of her group Students for Life of America - one of the largest anti-abortion organisations in the country.

Ms Hawkins read the court's decision in real time, shouting the words into her microphone: "The Constitution does not confer the right to abortion."

It was a generational victory for the anti-abortion movement - but for Ms Hawkins it was just a start.

"Our organisation was established as a post-Roe organisation," she told the BBC, referring to the 1973 Supreme Court decision overturned in June, which had guaranteed women's right to abortion nationwide.

The court's reversal has returned the decision over abortion to individual US states, paving the way for Ms Hawkins' ultimate goal.

"We want to see the states across America move to make abortion unavailable and unthinkable," she said.

Ms Hawkins and her allies already have a new target in their sights: abortion pills.

In the days since Roe was repealed, demand for the medication has exploded, setting the stage for the abortion war's new front.

The two-pill regimen was first approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2000, for use up to 10 weeks of pregnancy.

Medication-induced abortions are now the most common method of ending pregnancies in the US.

The first drug, mifepristone, ends a pregnancy and the second, misoprostol, empties the uterus. Mifepristone is also used to treat women who have suffered miscarriages and Cushing syndrome, a hormone-related condition. Misoprostol has been available by prescription for decades as a treatment for stomach ulcers and to manage postpartum haemorrhaging.

Less expensive and less invasive than the surgical option, medication abortion, as it is known, has long been championed by pro-choice groups.

Throughout two decades of use, the FDA, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynaecologists (ACOG) and other mainstream medical organisations have maintained that both mifepristone and misoprostol are safe for use. US studies say medication abortion is about 95% effective in ending pregnancy and requires further medical follow-up less than 1% of the time.

But increasingly, anti-abortion campaigners have promoted claims that abortion medication - cast as "chemical abortion" - is ineffective and dangerous.

"These drugs have caused injury, infertility, death," Ms Hawkins said. "Every single abortion ends one life, but chemical abortion is going to start ending two lives and they [pro-choice campaigners] are going to be responsible for it."

The FDA has reported a total of 26 deaths associated with mifepristone since it was approved - a rate of about 0.65 deaths per 100,000 medication abortions. For comparison, the death rate associated with habitual aspirin use is about 15.3 deaths per 100,000 aspirin users. And a five day course of azithromycin, a common antibiotic used to treat bacterial infections like bronchitis and sore throats, there were 42 cardiovascular deaths (31.5 per 1 million courses) and 29 sudden cardiac deaths (21.8 per 1 million courses), according to a recent study.

When mifepristone was first approved by the FDA, it was placed in a programme for risky drugs because most of the safety data came from outside the US. And for years, mifepristone remained among the most heavily regulated drugs in the country, despite growing evidence demonstrating the drug was safe.

In April 2021, the FDA announced it would lift the in-person dispensing requirement for mifepristone for the duration of the Covid-19 pandemic. In December, the FDA permanently lifted that requirement, allowing the medication to be sent by mail. A spokeswoman at the time said the agency had conducted a "comprehensive review" of published safety data before making the change.

The decision, lauded by pro-choice activists and mainstream medical organisations, expanded access to those unable to travel to a clinic, often people of colour, low-income individuals and those in rural areas.

Even before the Supreme Court Roe reversal, anti-abortion groups targeted abortion pills with force. In the first five months of 2022, lawmakers proposed 117 restrictions across 22 states specifically on medication abortion, including outright bans.

"Abortion opponents are keenly aware that a pregnant person could access medication through an online provider," said Elizabeth Nash, a policy analyst with the Guttmacher Institute, a pro-choice research group. "They've seen this method grow, and be used more and more and so they're saying: 'OK, we need to limit access'".

Without federal abortion protection, more restrictions will follow.

In recent days, abortion - including medication abortion - has been prohibited in at least 10 states, sometimes with exceptions for rape or incest. Nearly a dozen states are expected to follow. Some anti-abortion advocates have targeted the pills specifically, barring the use of telemedicine or the delivery of medication by mail.

"Our hands have been untied," said Carol Tobias, president of anti-abortion group National Right to Life, to the BBC. "Now we really get a chance to defend these babies."

But as bans have rolled in and abortion clinics have shuttered, demand for abortion pills has surged.

In the hours after the Supreme Court's decision, patient numbers doubled at telemedicine abortion clinic Hey Jane over the month before, while its website traffic grew tenfold. The organisation is now seeing four times as many patients than this time last year.

Plan C, an abortion pill advocacy group, had 311,000 visitors on its website in the single weekend after Roe was repealed, founder Amy Merrill told the BBC - well above its previous monthly average of 50,000.

"It was like a dam had broken," she said.

Indeed, pro-choice advocates say abortion medication will be a lifeline to women in states where the procedure is prohibited.

Abortion pills must be prescribed by providers where the procedure is legal, to a patient in that state. But pro-choice groups have already developed workarounds for states where it is banned.

Some are sending fleets of mobile clinics to the borders of abortion-restricted states. Others are developing plans for mailing pills to women in states with abortion bans anyway. One of these groups, Shout Your Abortion, sold out a line of T-shirts that say: "I will aid and abet an abortion."

"We believe abortion pills by mail will continue to be a reality in all 50 states, no matter what bans exist," said Ms Merrill.

Most anti-abortion activists have long said they want to see abortion providers punished, but not the mothers themselves.

"We would certainly go after abortion providers," said National Right to Life's Carol Tobias. "I would want to know who provided the pills."

But if a person receives abortion medication from outside her state - or the country - who is there to punish?

Democratic-led states have already started to help. California, New York and Connecticut have moved to shield doctors from penalties from other states for helping women in restrictive states obtain an abortion. And one major abortion pill provider - Aid Access - is based in Europe, falling outside the jurisdiction of law enforcement within the US.

Still, pro-choice advocates warned that anti-abortion campaigners will enforce their bans broadly.

"They talk about criminalising anybody who, quote unquote 'aids and abets' somebody seeking abortion care," said Dina Montemarano, research director at NARAL Pro-Choice America. "Is that the Uber driver who drives them to the airport to seek an abortion out of state? Is that their friend who helps them pay for that flight?"

​​"They have been dodging this question," she said.

State bans on abortion pills may also face legal hurdles. On Friday, President Joe Biden issued an executive order, directing his health secretary to "protect access to medication abortion". And last month, US Attorney General Merrick Garland said states could not ban the FDA-approved medication "based on disagreement with the FDA's expert judgement about its safety and efficacy".

Ms Hawkins called the FDA and Biden administration's support of mifepristone "absolutely hypocritical", repeating her claims that abortion pills were dangerous.

"This is what the abortion industry is trying to do, this is their post-Roe plan," she said.

GenBioPro Inc, a company that sells mifepristone, has already challenged Mississippi's restriction on the medication, saying they are "pre-empted" by the FDA - meaning federal law overrides state bans.

"This is not the end," Ms Merrill said. "If I have hope, it's that this is a situation in flux."

Roe v Wade: Church that helped Jane Roe still aids abortion-seekers

A Texas church in Dallas, one of the most religious cities in the United States, has become a haven for those seeking abortions. For members, its long history in the fight for reproductive choice brings hope for a post-Roe future.

Short presentational grey line

It was well before dawn in Dallas but a group of women were already seated scrolling through their phones or picking at a free continental breakfast in the classroom where they had been told to gather. Bleary-eyed and yawning, they were waiting to board a flight that would change their lives.

Many were women of colour, all were from different backgrounds. A teenager came with her mom. Another woman drove through the night from Oklahoma.

But they all had one thing in common - each was more than six weeks pregnant and could not legally obtain an abortion in the state of Texas.

They had also all placed their trust in a seemingly unlikely source - volunteers with the First Unitarian Church of Dallas - who would fly them to New Mexico, where they could end their pregnancies.

The tension was palpable as the church's senior pastor, Rev Daniel Kanter, addressed the women assembled.

"God loves you. You have dignity and worth and your life is the priority here," he said. "If you're surprised a person of faith like me is standing in front of you saying that - that's a good thing. But it shouldn't be".

An earthquake Supreme Court decision in the US last week has reversed a 50-year precedent which had said that American women had a constitutional right to an abortion - and many of those who had campaigned for this reversal were prominent Christians.

Yet the issue of abortion and faith is a lot more varied. First Unitarian Church of Dallas, specifically, has a long history fighting for abortion access, having helped bring about the 1973 ruling that had guaranteed the right to the procedure.

That mission has not ended with the reversal of Roe v Wade - and First Unitarian's fresh fight to help women get abortions reveals much about surprising divisions among American Christians over the matter.

Before abortion was legalised in 1973, people would often turn to faith leaders for help with unintended pregnancies. In 1967, a network of Protestant and Jewish leaders founded the Clergy Consultation Service to provide counselling and referrals to doctors who would perform the procedure. It's estimated the service helped more than 400,000 people access abortions.

Harder lines emerged in the later decades of the 20th Century after Roe. Today, abortion is seen by many evangelical Christians and Catholics as a clear-cut case of murder, condemned in the Bible. According to a recent survey by the Pew Research Centre, nearly three-quarters (74%) of white evangelical Protestants believe abortion should be illegal in all or most cases.

Within those figures, though, are hidden nuances.

Almost two-thirds of black Protestants and a majority of white protestants who are not evangelical, say the opposite - that the procedure should be legal in all or most cases - as do a majority of Catholics.

The division often comes down to an existential question about when life begins, and a theological debate over how Jesus instructs followers to live their lives. For Albert Mohler Jr, an evangelical Baptist and president of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, the Supreme Court's decision to overturn Roe "was absolutely necessary". For Mr Mohler, and thousands of evangelical Christians, the Bible is unequivocal on abortion.

"Every single life is made in God's image and thus is of priceless, infinite worth," he said, adding that Christians who say otherwise differ from him not just theologically, but morally.

"I have to work and pray that that division remains peaceful and insofar as it's possible, respectful," he said.

But for pro-choice Christians, it is supporting reproductive choice that's in keeping with the example Jesus set, according to Katey Zeh, a Baptist minister and CEO of the Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice.

Christ "showed up for people in their vulnerable moments, especially for people who were impacted by systemic oppression and those who were pushed to the margins," she said. "I see Him being a clinic escort, being there inside to hold their hands."

The Unitarian Universalists have long been in the pro-choice camp.

"Before Roe, the clergy of my church were driving women to the Gulf of Mexico to get on boats to go out in international waters and have legal and safe abortion," Rev Kanter said.

The denomination as a whole has roots in Protestant Christianity, but now incorporates traditions from other faiths. Many Unitarian Universalists today still identify as Christian, however.

It was January 1970 when the women's group of the First Unitarian Church of Dallas's women's group met to discuss an issue dividing the nation then as now: abortion.

According to minutes seen by the BBC, they were joined by a young lawyer named Linda Coffee, who along with her colleague Sarah Weddington, was determined to file a lawsuit against the state of Texas over its restrictions to abortion access.

Ann*, who was seated among the women gathered that day, said that - much like the country - opinions about abortion among the women in the group at the time varied greatly.

"But the more we learned about how difficult it actually was [to get an abortion]... we just got radicalised," the now-92-year-old said.

As none of the women were pregnant at the time, none could serve as a plaintiff, so they helped by submitting a key legal brief in support of reproductive choice when Coffee and Weddington did go to court with the Roe v Wade case.

Today, that legacy continues and there are reminders of it throughout the church.

Signs in the lobby inform visitors that the church provides Plan B, an emergency contraceptive pill, to anyone in need. There's also information about Our Whole Lives, the comprehensive sex education course that Unitarian Universalists offer from kindergarten through to adulthood. The programme emphasises healthy relationships, consent and communication, sex, and reproductive health access.

Many of the church's members shared their own stories with the BBC. There's Adryelle, who nearly died giving birth to her first child and said she could not imagine being forced to continue a pregnancy. Or Peg, who said she felt lucky because before abortions were legal in the United States, she had been able to have a safe and legal abortion while traveling in the United Kingdom.

Rev Kanter said that history was front of mind when he started the New Mexico abortion access network. The programme, which began when Texas passed one of the most restrictive abortion laws in the country last year, is funded through donations from pro-choice people of different faith backgrounds across the country. To qualify for the network's assistance, the person seeking an abortion must be below the poverty line - but that's where the requirements end.

The church says its role is simply to facilitate access, not to encourage people to have - or not have - the procedure. That is a personal choice, Rev Kanter said.

On a recent Sunday, he shared from the pulpit the story of his own experience with abortion.

He spoke openly of falling in love, sex, youthful indiscretion, and ultimately a difficult decision with a former partner to end the pregnancy. Part of his decision to become a minister was to heal from the experience, he said.

Unbeknownst to many, the church hired plain-clothes officers who were seated among the congregation that Sunday, in acknowledgement of how volatile the issue has become.

With Roe v Wade overturned, more and more states will pass abortion bans. Rev Kanter said he expects to increase the frequency of the trips from Texas to New Mexico.

On the night Roe v Wade was overturned, the church gathered again to join hands and pray for strength to continue their mission to help abortion-seekers.

"Hold this grief, but not too long," he told his congregants. "We will still do what we can to help women get safe and legal abortions."

Nvidia: The chip maker that became an AI superpower

Shares in computer chip designer Nvidia soared this week, taking the company's valuation close to the trillion dollar mark.

The surge was sparked by its latest quarterly results which were released late on Wednesday. The company said it was raising production of chips to meet "surging demand".

Nvidia has come to dominate the market for chips used in artificial intelligence (AI) systems.

Interest in that sector reached frenzied levels after ChatGPT went public last November, which sent a jolt well beyond the technology industry.

From helping with speeches, to computer coding and cooking, ChatGPT has proved to be a wildly popular application of AI.

But all that would not be possible without powerful computer hardware - in particular computer chips from California-based Nvidia.

Originally known for making the type of computer chips that process graphics, particularly for computer games, Nvidia hardware underpins most AI applications today.

"It is the leading technology player enabling this new thing called artificial intelligence," says Alan Priestley, a semiconductor industry analyst at Gartner.

"What Nvidia is to AI is almost like what Intel was to PCs," adds Dan Hutcheson, an analyst at TechInsights.

ChatGPT was trained using 10,000 of Nvidia's graphics processing units (GPUs) clustered together in a supercomputer belonging to Microsoft.

"It is one of many supercomputers - some known publicly, some not - that have been built with Nvidia GPUs for a variety of scientific as well as AI use cases," says Ian Buck, general manager and vice president of accelerated computing at Nvidia.

Nvidia has about 95% of the GPU market for machine learning, noted a recent report from CB Insights.

Its AI chips, which it also sells in systems designed for data centres, cost roughly $10,000 (£8,000) each, though its latest and most powerful version sells for far more.

So how did Nvidia become such a central player in the AI revolution?

In short, a bold bet on its own technology plus some good timing.

Jensen Huang, now the chief executive of Nvidia, was one of its founders back in 1993. Then, Nvidia was focused on making graphics better for gaming and other applications.

In 1999 it developed GPUs to enhance image display for computers.

GPUs excel at processing many small tasks simultaneously (for example handling millions of pixels on a screen) - a procedure known as parallel processing.

In 2006, researchers at Stanford University discovered GPUs had another use - they could accelerate maths operations, in a way that regular processing chips could not.

It was at that moment that Mr Huang took a decision crucial to the development of AI as we know it.

He invested Nvidia's resources in creating a tool to make GPUs programmable, thereby opening up their parallel processing capabilities for uses beyond graphics.

That tool was added to Nvida's computer chips. For computer games players it was a capability they didn't need, and probably weren't even aware of, but for researchers it was a new way of doing high performance computing on consumer hardware.

It was that capability that helped sparked early breakthroughs in modern AI.

In 2012 Alexnet was unveiled - an AI that could classify images. Alexnet was trained using just two of Nvidia's programmable GPUs.

The training process took only a few days, rather than the months it could have taken on a much larger number of regular processing chips.

The discovery - that GPUs could massively accelerate neural network processing - began to spread among computer scientists, who started buying them to run this new type of workload.

"AI found us," says Mr Buck.

Nvidia pressed its advantage by investing in developing new kinds of GPUs more suited to AI, as well as more software to make it easy to use the technology.

A decade, and billions of dollars later, ChatGPT emerged - an AI that can give eerily human responses to questions.

AI start-up Metaphysic creates photorealistic videos of celebrities and others using AI techniques. Its Tom Cruise deep fakes created a stir in 2021.

To both train and then run its models it uses hundreds of Nvidia GPUs, some purchased from Nvidia and others accessed through a cloud computing service.

"There are no alternatives to Nvidia for doing what we do," says Tom Graham, its co-founder and chief executive. "It is so far ahead of the curve."

Yet while Nvidia's dominance looks assured for now, the longer term is harder to predict. "Nvidia is the one with the target on its back that everybody is trying to take down," notes Kevin Krewell, another industry analyst at TIRIAS Research.

Other big semiconductor companies provide some competition. AMD and Intel are both better known for making central processing units (CPUs), but they also make dedicated GPUs for AI applications (Intel only recently joined the fray).

Google has its tensor processing units (TPUs), used not only for search results but also for certain machine-learning tasks, while Amazon has a custom-built chip for training AI models.

Microsoft is also reportedly developing an AI chip, and Meta has its own AI chip project.

In addition, for the first time in decades, there are also computer chip start-ups emerging, including Cerebras, SambaNova Systems and Habana (bought by Intel). They are intent on making better alternatives to GPUs for AI by starting from a clean slate.

UK-based Graphcore makes general purpose AI chips it calls intelligence processing units (IPUs), which it says have more computational power and are cheaper than GPUs.

Founded in 2016, Graphcore has received almost $700m (£560m) in funding.

Its customers include four US Department of Energy national labs and it has been pressing the UK government to use its chips in a new supercomputer project.

"[Graphcore] has built a processor to do AI as it exists today and as it will evolve over time," says Nigel Toon, the company's co-founder and chief executive.

He acknowledges going up against a giant like Nvidia is challenging. While Graphcore too has software to make its technology accessible, it is hard to orchestrate a switch when the world has built its AI products to run on Nvidia GPUs.

Mr Toon hopes that over time, as AI moves away from cutting-edge experimentation to commercial deployment, cost-efficient computation will start to become more important.

Back at Nvidia, Ian Buck is not overly concerned about the competition.

"Everyone has the need for AI now," he says. "It is up to others to work out where they are going to make a contribution."

Turkey's soft-spoken Kemal Kilicdaroglu takes on powerful Erdogan

Kemal Kilicdaroglu, 74, is in the fight of his career.

He has mounted the strongest opposition challenge to Turkey's most powerful man, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, since he took power more than 20 years ago, but still fell short of his rival in the first round.

His chances are looking slim in the 28 May run-off vote, but Turkey's mild-mannered opposition leader has assured supporters they have victory in their grasp.

"The will for change in the society is higher than 50%," he insisted.

The former civil servant is the very antithesis of Turkey's grandstanding, powerful president.

His trademark gesture for the election was initially a heart-shape gesture with his hands. But ahead of the run-off vote he adopted a more strident tone, banging his fists on the table and raising his voice.

Seeking to attract nationalist votes, he highlighted his pledge to send home 3.5 million Syrian refugees within two years and accused his rival of allowing 10 million refugees into Turkey.

Gone was his earlier inclusive tone, and the more nationalist stance risked alienating many Kurds in Turkey who provided a key source of support in the first round.

Kemal Kilicdaroglu was perhaps not the most obvious candidate for six opposition parties to unite behind as their best chance of victory.

He has lost several elections since he took charge of the Republican People's Party (CHP) in 2010, when his predecessor was forced out because of an extra-marital affair.

And yet Kemal Kilicdaroglu is a highly experienced politician. He was elected in 2002, the same year Mr Erdogan's ruling AK Party came to power.

He has survived a string of violent attacks, earning the reputation of being one of Turkey's most-targeted politicians, and wore a bullet-proof vest at his final rallies ahead of Sunday's vote.

In his 13 years as leader, he has broadened his party's appeal and "embraced all the different colours in the country", as he puts it.

He posted on social media a series of videos from his modest kitchen, often addressing young voters on highly sensitive issues such as being a Kurd or a minority Alevi, as he is.

In a soft tone, he reached out to voters by saying that he would unite all of Turkey's different strands of society.

The CHP charts its origins back to Turkey's modern secular founder Kemal Ataturk.

It was long considered close to the military, which has overthrown the government four times since 1960, and was always seen as a hardline party on the issue of dividing church and state. After the military coup in 1980, for example, it supported the ban on headscarves at schools and public services.

Born in December 1948, Kemal Kilicdaroglu - pronounced Kilitch-daro-lu - was the fourth of seven children brought up by a housewife and civil servant in the eastern city of Tunceli. He comes from an Alevi family - a distinct Islamic sect, and religious minority in mostly-Sunni Turkey.

He was a star student at the many schools he attended as his family following his father's job around Turkey and later studied economics at Ankara University.

He spent years as a civil servant in Turkey's financial bodies and won a reputation for weeding out corruption as director of the overarching Social Security Institution.

After seven years in parliament, he was selected to run for one of Turkey's most powerful and prestigious roles, the mayor of Istanbul. Although he lost the race, he won praise for his campaign and became a very credible runner-up for the CHP with 37% of the vote.

Within a year of that success, the leader of the CHP resigned after a secret video tape emerged of an affair - and Mr Kilicdaroglu unexpectedly found himself as prime candidate for the job.

Initially he refused to run for the leadership, not wishing to take advantage of a scandal. But his stance softened and he won the race by a landslide.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan was by now at the peak of his power, becoming Turkey's most successful modern-era prime minister by winning almost half the vote for his Justice and Development or AK Party in 2011 elections.

The CHP came a distant second, but increased its vote by five percentage points. Its leader has since struggled to go beyond winning a quarter of the vote, engulfed in party politics.

But in his 13 years in charge he has led a quiet revolution within the party. He has tried to make peace with the Islamists through gestures like attending Iftar dinners to break the fast during Ramadan, and has erased the party's old militaristic codes.

"When I first met him, I thought that he was not a revolutionary leader but an evolutionary one," said former party colleague Melda Onur.

"He locks on to his target, sticks to it with incredible serenity, and by the end you're convinced. He is very decisive when he thinks that is the right thing to do."

That is why she believes it took him 13 years to reshape his party and secure its backing to run for the presidency.

True to his background, he has also maintained strict financial discipline. "He is very careful about not spending any extra for anything unnecessary," said close associate Okan Konuralp.

In time he introduced religious figures, Kurdish activists and women's rights activists to the party - to prove to Turkish society that the CHP has changed.

"The CHP has a very male dominant structure, he couldn't pull down that wall completely but he likes to work with women," said Ms Onur.

One party colleague told the BBC he never raised his voice.

"Sometimes things drive us crazy and we cannot help but scream. Even then, Kilicdaroglu keeps his calm," he said.

The moment anyone enters the room, he stands up and shakes hands, never talks to people sitting behind the desk, and never interrupts anyone, his colleague said.

This soft-spoken nature coupled with a passing physical resemblance to the former Indian leader have even given rise to his nickname Gandhi Kemal.

As has his peaceful response to physical attack.

He was punched twice by a visitor in parliament in 2014 while about to give a speech to his party's MPs. Despite suffering a bruised cheek and eye, he called on colleagues to keep calm: "The path to democracy is full of obstacles."

In 2016, his convoy was attacked by a missile by the Kurdish militant group the PKK and then the following year he escaped an attempted bombing by the militant Islamic State group.

He survived an attempted lynching in 2019 at a soldier's funeral. As he came under attack he was taken to a nearby house where a woman urged the crowd to burn it down.

When police ushered him to safety he said afterwards: "These attempts cannot stop us."

But it was after the failed 2016 coup that Kemal Kilicdaroglu's reputation spread beyond Turkey.

As President Erdogan cracked down on dissent, arresting and sacking thousands of Turks seen as linked to the coup plotters, the opposition leader launched a "March for Justice", walking 450km (280 miles) from Ankara to Istanbul.

Despite the success of his march, he chose not to challenge for the presidency the following year, waiting another five years to seize his chance.

It then took him months to convince other opposition parties to back his bid. The CHP has better speakers, and arguably higher-profile figures who won the race for mayor in Istanbul and Ankara.

But with his main rival at his weakest, party colleagues felt this was their leader's moment.

"I have never heard a word of hatred from his mouth. He could be angry with someone but keeps calm and then forgives that person easily," said Okan Konuralp.

Property guardians move with the times to save cash

Moving home is an upheaval. Just ask Kevin Harris. He's done it eight times in the last eight years. But it has meant that he's lived in some pretty interesting places.

"I've woken up and counted myself lucky that I've got an amazing place to live in which is a little out of the ordinary," he says.

That's an understatement. His homes have included a former children's nursery, a Victorian hunting lodge and a disused police station.

Today, home is an old EMI building in west London. It's part of the site where records by the Beatles, the Rolling Stones and Pink Floyd were pressed.

Kevin shares the three-storey building with 30 others. What was once an historic work space is now a living space, with each resident having their own individual room to sleep in. Some enjoy their own showers, while others share. Kitchen facilities are communal.

Residents pay an average of £350 per month, including utility bills.

Kevin is one of the UK's estimated 10,000 property guardians. He pays a property management company a monthly fee to live in what would otherwise be an empty building.

Guardians are subject to a monthly licence agreement that affords them fewer rights than a full tenancy - they can be given just 28 days' notice to leave and don't have the right to exclusive occupation of the property.

Properties are subject to health and safety regulations, so should be kitted out with suitable sleeping, cooking and washing facilities, if they don't already have them. They must also have functioning water and power supplies and be clean and safe.

The management companies look after the buildings on behalf of the owners. The thinking is that occupied properties are less likely to attract vandals and burglars. It is also cheaper than employing a security firm and avoids the property becoming derelict.

Demand is on the rise, fuelled by the housing shortage and the cost-of-living crisis.

The Property Guardian Providers Association (PGPA), which represents management companies, says that in 2020-21, some 32,000 people applied to become guardians. It expects that to rise to 50,000 this year.

In fact, the PGPA is warning the sector might not be able to meet demand because of a shortage of owners coming forward. It says they are deterred by having to comply with planning regulations designed for permanent homes when they would only be offering temporary housing.

Kevin first became a guardian eight years ago, after a bad experience with a private landlord and he's stuck to it ever since.

"The main [advantage] is the cost of guardianship is predominantly cheaper than private renting," he says. "More often than not you'll get more space for your money."

However, he says the downside is "the lack of security".

He works as a prop builder on movies such as Aliens and Tomb Raider, which means he has a lot of equipment at home on top of the possessions he has acquired over the years. "If someone says to me 'we need you to move' it's a lot of stress having to pack my kit down and move out."

But despite the transient nature of guardianship Kevin says he has never lived anywhere unsafe or unhygienic.

Kevin is an old hand at guardianship. But 31-year-old cargo inspector Matthew Whitaker and his wife Luciane, 32, are relatively new converts. They moved into a large old vicarage in the grounds of an abandoned Teesside church four months ago. They pay £400 per month for their five-bedroom property.

At first they were hesitant because they didn't know much about the scheme.

But once again, the prospect of cheap accommodation persuaded them to take the leap.

"With all the prices going up this year, we thought this would be ideal to save a bit of money - maybe buy a house in the next year or two," Matthew says.

While he admits it would be quite difficult to move at short notice, he's not put off by the month-to-month living arrangement.

"It's just one of the risks we decided to take. Hopefully it pays off."

The PGPA is the closest thing the sector has to a governing body and represents management companies covering 60% of property guardians in the UK. It sets out regulations and standards for its members and provides a complaints procedure for guardians.

Graham Sievers, the PGPA's chair, is keen to clear up one common misconception.

"The security aspect that guardians provide is simply by being in occupation," he says, reiterating that empty buildings are more likely to attract anti-social behaviour and squatters. "The guardians themselves are not expected to be security officers or patrol the building."

He insists guardianship is not a last resort for desperate people.

"We've had people who are approaching retirement, teachers for example, turning to guardianship so that they can save up money to buy their ideal cottage."

But he warns it's not for everyone. "You have to be prepared to have a more outward-looking, communal lifestyle."

Tenants also need to realise that the management companies keep a close eye on the building. "To ensure the safety of the property is maintained, your room can be inspected," he says.

The property guardian movement originated in the 1990s in the Netherlands, where there are now about 100,000 guardians. But it has yet to break into the mainstream in the UK.

Concerns have been raised about living standards. A recent report for the government found that "poor conditions prevail in property guardianship" in England. That's despite efforts by some companies and the PGPA to professionalise the sector, according to the study.

Graham Sievers says it is important to crack down on bad practice and advises guardians to make sure the companies they deal with are PGPA accredited.

He urges them to contact the authorities if they are experiencing dangerous or unsanitary living conditions. But he also maintains it's not enough for the sector to be left to police itself. He wants greater support from the government and more robust regulation.

A spokesman for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: "We do not endorse or encourage property guardianship as a form of housing. We recognise, however, that people have the right to make their own informed decisions about their housing choices and property guardians and local councils should follow our extensive guidance on their rights and responsibilities."

Meanwhile, Matthew Whitaker says that for the moment, he and his wife are happy to remain within the system, even if they have to move out of their vicarage at short notice. But they don't see guardianship as a long-term option.

"Once you have a family it's time to settle down," Matthew says. "I think with kids it would be a difficult circumstance."

Despite the big savings he has made over the years, Kevin Harris from west London also thinks there is a limit - but for different reasons.

"Through my time as a guardian I have made close friendships," he says.

"But I'm 55 years old," he adds. "I can't imagine doing this forever."

Fruit producers turn to nets for better crops

It's an elegantly simple solution to an age-old problem: to protect crops from hazards, keep them covered.

Nets are commonly used to keep out pests in vegetable production, particularly in high-value areas like seeds.

Yet in fruit production the use of nets is still being explored and tested, according to Mirella Aoun, an agronomist and researcher at Bishop's University in Quebec, Canada, who has been studying agricultural nets for over a decade.

Prof Aoun explains that initially fruit producers placed nets over trees primarily to protect them from hail damage. Now they are experimenting with nets that can protect against insects.

The mesh size of insect-proof nets is determined by the local conditions, including the nature of the insects.

Of course that could shut out the insects that farmers really do want - pollinators like bees.

One option is to apply the nets after the pollination period. Another is to open the nets during the day, while bringing in beehives.

Tree nets are particularly well established in French and Italian apple orchards, where nets draped over rows of apple trees limit the movements and egg laying of codling moths. This has helped farmers to get rid of persistent pests and reduce their use of costly and environmentally damaging chemical pesticides.

There are benefits to fruit lovers as well. "When you know that you have less pesticide residues from crops that are under exclusion nets, it's good news for consumers," says Prof Aoun.

Nets are also seen as a way of tackling the effects of climate change. Warmer conditions have seen the resurgence of some types of insects and diseases.

Some regions are seeing more intense periods of drought and heavy rain and nets can help with that.

For instance, depending on the location, the type of net, and the way it is used, a netting system can shield against the solar radiation that leads to heat stress and inhibits trees' photosynthesis.

But the introduction of a net could mean a more humid environment around the tree - not helpful for crops prone to fungal diseases in wetter climates like the northeastern US and Canada.

But some researchers are working on hydrophobic nets, where a treatment using a botanical pesticide essentially makes the nets water repellent.

Photoselective (coloured) nets can also affect the penetration of light. Dark, opaque nets reduce light intensity but not light quality.

Pearl-coloured nets can scatter light better so that it reaches more parts of the vegetation. Meanwhile, blue, red and yellow nets filter certain solar wavelengths and thus can stimulate specific responses in plants related to fruit quality.

Fine-tuning the net usage often leads to an increase in high-calibre fruit, according to Prof Aoun. As her research in the Mediterranean has shown, trees covered by coloured shade nets can produce larger and more vividly coloured fruit.

Nets are not always the answer. They may not be appropriate for smaller, more varied orchards. Nor are they necessary for all climate conditions.

Also, the nets used for fruit trees are typically made of polyethylene, which isn't ideal for a world attempting to move away from plastic dependence.

One of the companies working on non-plastic nets is Texinov, a French technical textiles firm. Texinov is researching various types of biodegradable nets, such as ones made from flax.

It has already introduced a biodegradable net made out of polylactic acid (PLA), which is produced from fermented corn. Industrial composting is needed to break down this type of net, which sales manager Adrien Etienne says is about 10% more expensive than a conventional net.

Mr Etienne says that the biodegradable nets are currently more popular in Europe than in North America. This may be linked to European policies intended to reduce insecticide use. "The nets, I think, will become more and more popular because insecticides are less popular," Mr Etienne says, for instance among French cherry farmers.

The upfront cost has been a barrier for some farmers. "Nets are of course a little bit expensive compared to insecticides," Mr Etienne acknowledges.

Texinov's cheapest net sells for around €0.50 (44p) per square metre for private use in France, according to Mr Etienne. This type of net lasts for only one or two seasons, although the heavy climate protection nets can last much longer. Durability depends on factors like solar exposure. "The nets are more and more fragile because of the sun," says Mr Etienne.

Overall, Prof Aoun says that prices are dropping as products become more varied and accessible. "In general the positive impact of the net is overwhelming the negative side," she summarises.

Jean-Marc Rochon heads the apple tree nursery Pépinière Rochon in Quebec and is keeping an eye on advances in netting.

"In my eyes, this technology is more in the development and improvement phase rather than in large-scale application," he says.

For Mr Rochon to begin using nets on his apple trees, the cost of the netting wouldn't be the only factor. "I see it more as a way of rethinking our ways of doing things," he explains.

To be viable for his nursery, the netting would have to be reliable and not create a work overload. It would also need to be useable on large orchard sections.

Clearly, technological refinements and communication will be necessary to convince more fruit growers that netting would be useful.

But Prof Aoun believes, "As we move toward more climatic challenges and unpredictable weather, protective cultivation using nets is the way forward."

How LinkedIn is changing and why some are not happy

Social media is where we project a version of ourselves. And a pensive Dan Kelsall is nothing like his rowdy character on LinkedIn, the social media platform famously tagged "Facebook for suits".

In the online world the co-founder of Manchester marketing firm Offended makes sure his business lives up to its name. His posts stick out for the prevalence of profanity and no holds barred humour.

Offended specialises in guerrilla marketing, turning the world of corporate messaging and polished branding upside down. As the irreverent Mr Kelsall puts it: "We don't just get our own ads banned, we get ads banned for our clients too."

With 900 million of the world's professionals registering their personal CV and career attainments on the site, LinkedIn has become a valuable resource for head-hunters and human resources departments.

But over the last three years or so, this once staid community billboard of career updates and business launches has seen a change in tone.

Many posts have become more personal, featuring the emotional backstories of its members with accounts of childhood influences and admissions of failings and frailties.

This is a far cry from the hard-sell approach beloved of many corporate players and not everyone is happy. Critics murmur that these posts are more suited to the weekend musings of Facebook or the raucous tone of Twitter.

So what has triggered this change? According to Mr Kelsall, boredom with corporate marketing is one culprit.

It's hard to imagine, but Mr Kelsall once worked as a copywriter for a tax software firm, producing "some of the driest things I've written". He may not have enjoyed this time, but it did give him an insight into what pulls in readers.

"Consumers are less and less trusting of big brands. People are tired of boring marketing.

"The skill is to speak like your audience and be relatable to your audience. I've been on LinkedIn for seven years and I've got 66,000 followers. That's a really engaged audience."

Parry Headrick founded Massachusetts public relations business Crackle. He attributes his entire client base to introductions via LinkedIn. There his followers learn about his penurious childhood and his own children's lives.

It's not to everyone's taste, though. One LinkedIn user responded to his disclosures with: "Nice story. It doesn't belong on LinkedIn."

Mr Headrick disagrees. "Engagement is about telling a compelling story. Your parents didn't read you a press release at bedtime, they read you stories. I try to give an insight into who I am if you work with me."

He is scathing about the effort businesses put into "company pages on LinkedIn that get no engagement", pointing out that human tales work. "It's the personal element that engenders trust."

Mr Headrick sees his personal pronouncements as "part of a broader shift away from corporate speak".

So what changed to make businesses so informal? Azadeh Williams thinks she knows.

Speaking from the Sydney offices of her media and marketing company, AZK Media, she explains why she shares updates about her six-year-old daughter. "I was a journalist for 20 years and I can spot marketing rigmarole and a contrived script. You have to be your crude, authentic self to attract your audience."

She wouldn't have posted this material a few years ago, but with the pandemic Zoom meetings intruded into the domestic space. This has changed everything. "Before Covid families didn't exist for your work colleagues. Now they've seen the families and it makes us more interesting."

She believes that while LinkedIn has evolved from being the home of CVs, many users retain the mindset that it's just a digital job interview.

Douglas Rode runs recruitment giant Page Group in the UK and Ireland. As LinkedIn is such an important tool in his world how does he view its new incarnation? "Even five years ago people didn't open up so much. Now there's greater awareness of people's vulnerabilities such as mental health and LinkedIn has magnified this."

As a job-hunting expert would he advise someone to bare their soul there? His response is very qualified. "It's a matter of individual choice. You are putting yourself out there so a future employer can see you. You're trying to get a balance and you want to sound human, not generic or automated."

Others are more pointed. Tom Skinner, of London marketing agency Go Up, fears LinkedIn's new emotional tone is merely a symptom of celebrity culture and "a society that celebrates people who can self-publicise above all else".

LinkedIn has a 200-strong team working on stories primed to attract attention and involvement, all grist to the mill of recruiting companies that pay it for the right to scour the CVs of its members.

Dan Roth, Editor in Chief at LinkedIn, denies cultivating controversy to pull in readers. "We use algorithms to determine the right content for you but we do not steer people in one direction."

He too credits the pandemic with the shift in attitudes. "People found they got remarkable feedback when they talked about their mental health." He sets great store by LinkedIn users being identifiable in contrast to anonymous contributions on Twitter. Yet despite this public profile many members are unaware of how cringeworthy their stories can be.

Braden Wallake rushed to LinkedIn when he made two staff at his Ohio company redundant in August 2022, boasting of how "vulnerable" he felt when making this decision. He even adorned the post with a tearful selfie.

The first response to his post was a single word. "Muppet."

Furthermore, he was rewarded with the online title, The Crying CEO, and became the poster boy for what behavioural insights expert Helen Jambunathan calls the "LinkedIn cringe".

Ms Jambunathan says LinkedIn's algorithms reward posts that provoke engagement, even if this dilutes its recruitment industry origins. "LinkedIn is becoming more personal and generalised, and less about 'work' as we know it."

This trend comes from the top. Research group Kekst CNC analysed the LinkedIn profiles of chief executives across the UK, US, Germany and Sweden, noting that 77% of them post personal content.

Maybe the "Facebook for suits" is fine with its new knockabout tone. And the louder the criticism, the more people listen.

Back in Manchester Mr Kelsall is relaxed about making the odd enemy. "Sometimes you need detractors as much as you need fans."

AI scanner used in hundreds of US schools misses knives

A security firm that sells AI weapons scanners to schools is facing fresh questions about its technology after a student was attacked with a knife that the $3.7m system failed to detect.

On Halloween last year, student Ehni Ler Htoo was walking in the corridor of his school in Utica, New York, when another student walked up behind him and stabbed him with a knife.

Speaking exclusively to the BBC, the victim's lawyer said the 18-year-old suffered multiple stab wounds to his head, neck, face, shoulder, back and hand.

The knife used in the attack was brought into Proctor High School despite a multimillion weapons detection system installed by a company called Evolv Technology.

Evolv Technology is a security firm that wants to replace traditional metal detectors with AI weapons scanners.

Instead of simply detecting metal, Evolv says its scanner "combines powerful sensor technology with proven artificial intelligence" to detect weapons.

When the system detects a concealed weapon - like knives, bombs or guns - it triggers an alert.

The company has publicly stated their system is highly accurate, and previously boasted its scanners can help to create "weapons-free zones".

The company's chief executive, Peter George, has also said that its systems "have the signatures for all the weapons that are out there".

Previous press releases have listed the weapons the system can find - which include firearms, explosive devices, and knives.

However, a BBC investigation last year revealed that testing had found the system could not reliably detect large knives - after Evolv's scanner missed 42% of large knives in 24 walk-throughs.

The system is used in major stadiums across the US, and the Manchester Arena in the UK. The testers said Evolv should inform potential clients.

Despite this, the company has been expanding into schools, and now claims to be in hundreds of them across the US.

The stabbing

In March 2022, the Utica Schools Board bought Evolv's weapons scanning system for 13 schools. It was installed over the summer holidays.

On 31 October, CCTV captured the perpetrator of the attack against Ehni Ler Htoo entering Proctor High School and passing through the Evolv weapons scanners, according to one source at the school who has seen the security footage.

"When we viewed the horrific video, we all asked the same question. How did the student get the knife into the school?" said Brian Nolan, Superintendent of Utica Schools.

The knife used in the stabbing was more than 9in (22.8cm) long.

The attack triggered an internal investigation by Utica's school district.

"Through investigation it was determined the Evolv Weapon Detection System… was not designed to detect knives," Mr Nolan said.

The scanners were removed from Proctor High School and replaced by 10 metal detectors. But the scanners are still operating in the district's remaining 12 schools. Mr Nolan says the district cannot afford to get rid of Evolv's system in its remaining schools.

Since that attack, Mr Nolan says three other knives have been found on students in other schools in the district where the Evolv systems continue to operate.

One of the knives was 7in long. Another was a curved blade with finger holes. Another was a pocket knife. Mr Nolan says they were all found because they were reported to staff - not because the weapons scanner had detected them.

"The kids [who had the knives] all said they walked right through the weapons detection system, we asked them about that… it truly, truly does not find knives," he said.

Evolv's website

After the stabbing, the wording on Evolv's website changed.

Up until October last year, Evolv's homepage featured a headline that boasted of "Weapons-Free Zones". The company then removed that wording, and changed the text to "Safe Zones". It has now been changed again and reads "Safer Zones".

Evolv claims its system uses cutting-edge AI technology to find weapons. However, its critics say not enough is known about how the system works - or how effective this technology is at finding different types of weapons.

The BBC sent a detailed right of reply to Evolv, laying out what had happened at the school in Utica, and the decision of the school to stop using its system.

We also asked what Evolv had told schools about what its system could and could not detect, whether it had told schools that independent testing had found its systems could not reliably detect large knives, and whether it thought its systems were suitable for use in schools. Evolv did not answer the questions.

Conor Healy of IPVM, a firm that analyses security equipment, says Evolv has exaggerated how effective the system is.

"There's an epidemic of schools buying new technology based on audacious marketing claims, then finding out it has hidden flaws, often millions of dollars later. Evolv is one of the worst offenders. School officials are not technical experts on weapons detection, and companies like Evolv profit from their ignorance."

Playing fast and loose with marketing claims is unacceptable when you sell a security product used to protect young people, he added.

Although Evolv did not give the BBC a comment, it did direct it to a blog post from its CEO, Peter George, in which he defends the lack of detail in how much the firm has said about how the technology works.

"Marketing weapons detection security requires a delicate balance between educating stakeholders on new technology and not providing bad actors with the information they could use to do harm," he said.

"So, while public-facing marketing materials are intentionally not specific, we communicate all aspects of the Evolv Express system - including limitations and capabilities - with the trusted security professionals at our customers, partners, and prospects", the blogpost read.

The BBC contacted seven other school districts that all use Evolv weapons scanners. Five did not respond. Two said they did not wish to comment.

Pakistan shut down the internet - but that didn't stop the protests

The battle between Imran Khan's supporters and the powerful Pakistani military has this week been raging on two fronts - on the streets and on social media. And on one battlefield, the former prime minister seems to have the upper hand.

Within hours of Imran Khan's arrest on Tuesday, Pakistan's government had clamped down on the country's internet, in a move to quell resistance.

The capture of the swashbuckling political leader immediately sparked protests nationwide.

In Lahore, Nighat Dad rushed home after hearing Khan had been detained. Leaving the office in the city centre, the lawyer's staff had already started to encounter violent protesters.

"A mob tried to attack their cars and stop them from leaving," she told the BBC.

As one of Pakistan's leading digital rights activists, she was also keeping an eye on the discourse raging online.

Images of stone-throwing protesters in clouds of teargas unrolled across social media and pinged across WhatsApp groups. Video of the arrest - Khan being swarmed by paramilitary troops - went viral. His party, the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI), spat out rapid-fire updates on their Twitter page.

To control the rapidly escalating situation, the government flipped the switch. Across the country, social media sites went down - people struggled to load Facebook, YouTube and Twitter.

Mobile networks were also blocked in some places, resulting in a full connectivity outage. Elsewhere, internet speeds were throttled.

When the blackout came, for most Pakistanis it wasn't unexpected. Those that could, booted up their VPNs - demand for the services which reroute a user's internet location skyrocketed by 1,300%, trackers later told the BBC. Those with mobile access continued on WhatsApp.

'Real news' online

Shutting down the internet has become a familiar move in the authoritarian playbook, particularly in South Asia in recent years. Authorities plunge the country offline to control the flow of information, and suppress any dissent or protest, experts say.

"Governments have a hammer, and it's easy to treat the internet as a nail," says Kathik Nachiappan, a South Asia expert based in Singapore.

In Pakistan, the move has particular impact because it shuts down what is seen to be the only place to get "real news" in the country - a decade of attacks on the country's independent journalists and newspapers by the military authorities is widely regarded to have muzzled the mainstream media.

Trust that mainstream outlets will adequately inform the public has broken down so much that people go online to find out "what is truly going on", says Uzair Younus, a Pakistani politics expert with The Atlantic Council, a US-based think tank.

"People say 'OK, it's not worth really watching television, because the military is governing what can and cannot be said,'" says Mr Younus.

So when it comes to breaking news like Khan's arrest, people flock online, to reputable journalists and YouTube channels as well as social media.

"I was glued to my screen at work, watching Geo News, one of the country's largest broadcasters," says Mr Younus. "But then I was getting a whole lot more information about protests - who had been shot, where tear gas was being shared - on WhatsApp and on Twitter. Geo was not covering any of that."

Of course, there are all the usual issues that come with relying on social media news - in Pakistan's bitterly complicated political scene, misinformation, disinformation, and conspiracy theories are all rampant, and often peddled by the political actors themselves.

No matter what kind of information people are consuming, limiting online access is a gross violation of fundamental rights, says Ms Dad, who runs the Digital Rights Foundation in Lahore.

"When you shut down the Internet, people have no choice in accessing information," she says.

She argues the authorities' blanket ban violates freedom of speech, access to information and the right to assembly - which are all enshrined in Pakistan's constitution. Internet access is a human right recognised by the United Nations.

Most severe censorship yet

But for Pakistanis, internet censorship days have become increasingly common since Mr Khan was voted out by parliament last April.

The charismatic politician has been on the comeback trail ever since, charging around the country on a convoy, loudly claiming his removal was illegitimate and the charges against him are false. He has spurred thousands to attend his rallies.

Netblocks, a UK-based internet monitor, has counted at least three major internet disruptions linked to Khan's rallies before his arrest - but this week's was the worst yet.

"This is possibly the most severe censorship that we've tracked for Pakistan in recent times," Netblocks researcher Alp Toker told the BBC.

"The scale of it and the fact it involves multiple forms of disruption - both the mobile networks and the social platforms - show a concerted effort to control the narrative."

Netblocks identified that the mobile networks affected had gone down in areas in Punjab - a Khan stronghold and Pakistan's most populous province. The telecoms authority later confirmed it had sent around the kill order following a directive from the interior ministry.

For Pakistan's current rulers, shutting down the internet is a significant move and one not taken lightly. It cuts off public access to healthcare, emergency and financial services.

It has been a big hit to an already failing economy, affecting businesses across the country. Tens of millions of Pakistanis - from delivery drivers to the tech community - rely on the Internet to earn a living.

On Wednesday, hundreds of Pakistani business leaders and civil rights figures signed a letter condemning the internet shutdown, expressing fears that it would negatively affect the country's vibrant tech sector - one of the only areas bringing in much-needed foreign investment.

But political watchers say it's clear that authorities are willing to sacrifice all that to cut off one of Mr Khan's greatest advantages- his dominance online.

Khan's online dominance

His party, the PTI, has the major edge over political competitors with a younger, tech-savvy voter base. Its social media machine - credited with delivering the 2018 election - is miles ahead of the competition.

The military and the government are worried about the party using social media for "anti-army political mobilisation" says Asfandyar Mir, a Pakistan politics and military watcher with the United States Institute of Peace. It's something that Khan himself is personally invested in, he says.

"The military in particular sees the scale of retweets and likes on twitter as a signal of political strength which can have knock on mobilisation effects," he said.

Since Khan's arrest, the PTI has been feeding a legion of about nine million followers on Twitter with hourly updates. Khan himself has over 19 million followers on Twitter - the military has about six million and the current PM, Shehbaz Sharif, 6.6 million followers.

What's even more galling for the military now, is that they had previously hitched their social media presence to Khan's bandwagon.

When Khan rose to power in 2018, then with the support of the military, the generals had outsourced the task of building their not insignificant social presence to the PTI as a joint effort. But when Khan and the army fell out, the PTI managed to wrest away most of their online following.

The military has since found itself on the back foot online, struggling to control the narrative, says Mr Younus. It fended off campaigns from the PTI coordinating followers through hashtags and site attacks.

Under attack on their YouTube account this week, the military at first disabled rabid comments from Khan's supporters. In the end, they just turned the whole thing off.

"Because they don't have the capability the PTI does on social media, the obvious answer was to turn it all off because that's the only way they can control things," says Mr Younus.

But blocking social media is only one layer of disruption. Much more crucial to organising efforts for protesters is WhatsApp - the messaging app seen as the backbone for information flow in the country.

Both political sides are pushing out their message on the app, but the PTI again has a slight upper hand.

"They've done a fantastic job of creating these communities and groups through which they proliferate information or their own narrative," Mr Younus says.

On Friday, as the situation remained tense across the country, most citizens still had little access to the internet.

The army had been deployed in the capital and the twists and turns in Khan's legal case threatened to kick protests off again.

Some people had regained access to Facebook and YouTube, but the restrictions were patchy and arbitrarily applied across the country.

The political fervour, however, remains at an all-time high and the discussion is still raging online.

"People are charged and emotions are high, not only because of what's happened to Imran Khan but also because of the economic downfall in the country," says Ms Dad.

"It's a mix of anger and frustration that has come to a boiling point. Everyone has something to say."

Polarised politics are tearing Pakistan apart

The stakes have never been higher in Pakistan.

Its economy is on the brink, society is politically polarised, millions are still recovering from last year's devastating floods, terror attacks are increasing and, as inflation soars ever higher, many are struggling to feed themselves and their children.

While the country suffers, politicians and institutions have been pulled into a power struggle over who should run Pakistan.

Despite the hours of air time, ferociously delivered ultimatums and street stand-offs, Pakistan seems no closer to answering that question than it was a year ago.

"What makes this current situation unprecedented is the backdrop of other serious crisis," says Michael Kugelman, director of the South Asia Institute at the Wilson Center.

"Pakistan doesn't have the luxury of saying this political crisis is a distraction, eventually we'll get back to where things need to be."

Pakistan's economy is struggling. Its foreign reserves, which pay for imports including fuel, have plummeted to one of the lowest levels in decades. Meetings with the International Monetary Fund earlier this year are yet to result in a deal to unlock $1.1bn in crucial funds.

Meanwhile militants continue to launch attacks, often targeting security forces. Pakistan's armed forces recently said there had been 436 terror attacks so far in 2023. And militant groups regularly release infographics showing the number they claim to have killed or injured, and the arms they've seized around the country.

Add to this the ever-climbing food inflation, plus the fact that Pakistan is still recovering from the damage done by last year's floods before this year's rains begin again - and there is no shortage of big questions politicians need to answer.

"Political uncertainty is making things even more difficult for the entire system," says Mehmal Sarfraz, a political analyst. "The system is collapsing in Pakistan. If that happens, it won't benefit anyone - neither the political parties or the people of Pakistan."

Why is politics deadlocked?

Analysts say the current situation was sparked when Imran Khan was ousted from his position as prime minister in April 2022 in a vote of no confidence.

"Khan refused to accept it," Mr Kugelman says. "And it was quite clear that the government was not going to ignore Khan's activism and agitation either."

Mr Khan responded with a series of rallies around the country, and a long march to the capital, Islamabad.

The number of court cases against him has been rising - his Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) party says there are over 100 - and charges include terrorism, corruption and contempt of court. But the former prime minister has made this a part of his campaign, accusing the government of living by the "law of the jungle".

Government ministers, in turn, have accused Mr Khan of acting out of ego and narcissism.

Police from Islamabad have twice arrived at his home in Lahore to arrest him after he failed to appear in court on multiple occasions.

Mr Khan, too, has pulled the government into court. His party dissolved two of the country's provincial assemblies to try to force a national election. When that failed, it appealed; the case is still in the Supreme Court.

These ongoing court battles have split the judiciary. The government has accused some judges of bias in Imran Khan's favour, and the division and furious disagreement has led to some fears of a constitutional crisis.

"Khan would not let the government sit and take rest," says Ahmad Bilal, a political analyst and founder president at Pakistan Institute of Legislative Development And Transparency. "The entire focus [for this government] has been on maintaining their existence."

Mr Bilal also thinks the stand-off is related to Mr Khan's personality.

"He isn't ready to make a genuine compromise," Mr Bilal says. He argues that Mr Khan's inability to do so is counterproductive and may even hurt him in the long run.

Some think that the deadlock is also a sign that Pakistan's institutions are failing. "There is no group that can mediate. The establishment doesn't have credibility," Ms Sarfraz says.

The establishment is the shorthand often used to refer to Pakistan's military and intelligence services. The army has played a prominent role in politics, sometimes seizing power in military coups, and, on other occasions, pulling levers behind the scenes.

Many analysts believe Mr Khan's election win in 2018 happened with the help of the military. Now in opposition, he is one of its most vocal critics, and analysts say the army's popularity has fallen.

"There are clear indications that there is a lack of agreement within the army on the proper way forward," Mr Kugelman says.

"My sense is that the senior-most army leadership would be happy not to see him involved in politics any more, whereas many elements in the lower and middle ranks of the army are big supporters of Khan. Khan has polarised politics, he's polarised the public and he's polarised the army as well, which is a difficult feat to pull off."

What next?

General elections are due to take place this year, but the fear is that it could be delayed using the same reasons used to delay the provincial assembly polls - insufficient funds and the security situation. That would be very damaging, Mr Bilal says.

"I think it would be very unfortunate and will probably damage the democratic process in Pakistan, maybe in an unrepairable manner. We've never seen elections postponed."

The government and Mr Khan's PTI party have already held talks about the elections. While there is common agreement that the national and provincial elections should be held at the same time, there is still no agreement about when that might happen.

But even agreeing on dates might not be enough, according to Ms Sarfraz.

"Even if elections do take place now, there will not be a conflict resolution unless and until the political parties decide what their red lines are." She argues that if both sides don't set out exactly what they expect to keep elections fair, both will dispute the result and continue to divide the country.

That leaves it up to the politicians to come to an agreement, a difficult task in a fraught, politically divided country.

"You're political rivals, you're not personal enemies," Ms Sarfraz says.

"It's time that we take things forward and talk to each other before there's a collapse of the entire system."

Post Office IT fiasco: 'Decade of hell' for accused

Sub-postmasters say being accused of theft, fraud and false accounting has destroyed their health and reputations.

More than 550 ex-Post Office workers are to get a share of £58m in an out-of-court settlement that ends a 20-year fight for justice.

Faults with accounting system Horizon led to shortfalls in branch accounts, leading to workers being convicted of theft and many jailed.

Three postmasters affected by the fiasco share their stories.

'Our reputation in our community was totally destroyed'

Balvinder Singh Gill moved to Oxford from his home town of Coventry after he was married in 2003 to "start a new life" as sub-postmaster at the town's Cowley Road branch.

But "a decade of hell" later, he had suffered a mental breakdown which led to him being sectioned.

He says his life was destroyed after he was accused of stealing £108,000 from the Post Office.

"I had problems from day one," he said. His weekly balance would show a "massive shortfall" and he just could not balance the books.

One morning, six months in, he was suddenly locked out of the office by auditors.

"They turned up a little bit like a pseudo police force. They interviewed me in a back room. They interrogated me," he said.

Eventually he was told he had to repay the full amount in monthly instalments and was chased relentlessly by debt collectors.

"Financially it really wiped me away. I had to declare bankruptcy. They said if I didn't pay it back they'd take me to prison. They said I was the only case," he said.

In a double blow for the family, in 2009 his mother Kashmir, now postmistress, was found guilty of stealing £57,000 from the same branch, a conviction she is now hoping will be overturned by the Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC).

'More than money'

The family went from being reputable business owners to working in local kitchens or petrol stations on minimum wage.

"Our reputation in our community was totally destroyed. My family broke up over this... I broke up with my wife some years later," said Mr Gill.

Now, the news of the settlement is still sinking in.

"More than the money, it's just the justice. Mainly that we can get on with our lives and put right a lot of people who thought we were bad," he said.

'We lost our business, we lost our home'

Wendy Buffrey said she burst in to tears when she read on Twitter that the Post Office had agreed to settle.

The former sub-postmistress of the Up Hatherley branch in Cheltenham was advised to plead guilty to false accounting in 2010 to avoid jail after a shortfall of £26,000 was identified in her accounts.

Unable to explain the discrepancy, she took out a loan to repay the difference and is still counting the cost today.

"We lost our business. We lost our home. I had to pay the Post Office £26,000," said Mrs Buffrey.

"We had to start again. There isn't any monetary figure that can compensate for the way we were treated and the way things happened to us," she added.

Wendy Buffrey said she burst in to tears when she read on Twitter that the Post Office had agreed to settle.

The former sub-postmistress of the Up Hatherley branch in Cheltenham was advised to plead guilty to false accounting in 2010 to avoid jail after a shortfall of £26,000 was identified in her accounts.

Unable to explain the discrepancy, she took out a loan to repay the difference and is still counting the cost today.

"We lost our business. We lost our home. I had to pay the Post Office £26,000," said Mrs Buffrey.

"We had to start again. There isn't any monetary figure that can compensate for the way we were treated and the way things happened to us," she added.

'We were on suicidal watch'

Rubbina Shaheen was accused of taking £43,000 from her branch - and ended up serving three months in jail.

The settlement gives her hope that her conviction for falsifying accounts at the Greenfields post office in Shrewsbury will be quashed.

She was jailed in 2010 after accepting a plea bargain to drop a theft charge.

"When they said I was going to prison I was just totally devastated. I didn't know what to say, what to do," said Mrs Shaheen, 54, who is on dialysis for renal failure.

Husband Mohamed Hami, 65, added: "We were both on suicidal watch. The only good part is that we were both holding each other's hands."

Mrs Shaheen worked as postmistress whilst her husband ran the connecting convenience store.

She initially had money deducted from her salary after an £8,000 discrepancy was identified in 2007, but two years later, her contract was immediately terminated after £43,000 went missing.

Despite Mrs Shaheen identifying "at least 11 errors" on the Horizon system, she was not believed, said Mr Hami.

After her release from prison, the couple ended up living in a van, evicted from the shop's living quarters by the bank after falling into arrears.

Eventually they cashed in their pensions to buy a derelict house in Brockton, Shropshire and Mr Hami took a job at a Shropshire school, selling tuck.

Mrs Shaheen is not part of the group action but is now feeling "hopeful but at the same time sceptical", that she will be vindicated by the CCRC.

Her husband feels the Post Office should be "hanged dry" for making them feel "absolutely dirt."

"Nothing can replace our health. Let's hope fingers crossed that we can up ourselves a bit. Hold our head high," he added.

The CCRC said that it would now consider the impact of the out of court settlement on the 34 Horizon related cases it had under review.

The Post Office said on Wednesday that it accepted it had got things wrong in its past dealings with a number of postmasters and looked forward to moving ahead.

Ukraine war: The deadly landmines killing hundreds

Across Ukraine's vast expanse, there are thought to be 174,000 square kilometres which are contaminated by landmines.

It is an area of land larger than England, Wales and Northern Ireland combined.

In the war-scarred Kharkiv region, warning signs occasionally appear next to brown, barren fields which were once front lines.

Even more infrequent is the sight of demining teams sweeping their metal detectors across small, taped-off areas. A literal scratching of the surface.

More landmines have been found in the Kharkiv region than anywhere else in Ukraine.

This part of north-eastern Ukraine close to the Russian border has been both occupied and liberated over the past year.

On 24 February 2022, Russia launched its full scale invasion and seized swathes of territory in the Kharkiv region, while also trying to capture Kharkiv city itself.

By May they would lose the battle for Ukraine's second biggest city. By September, they'd be blindsided by a Ukrainian counteroffensive.

The Russians deployed landmines to both defend their positions and slow the Ukrainians. After leaving in a rush, a lethal footprint was left behind.

In the small town of Balakliya, on a patch of land next to an apartment block, Oleksandr Remenets' team have already found six anti-personnel mines. They'd earlier uncovered around 200 nearby.

"My family calls me every morning to tell me to watch where I tread," he says. "One of our guys lost his foot last year."

The day after we spoke, another member of his team was wounded by a mine.

Since September, 121 civilians have been injured in the Kharkiv region alone, according to the State Emergency Service. 29 were killed.

More than 55,000 explosives have been found in the area.

Deminers like Oleksandr are called "heroes" by the regional authorities, yet there's a deep frustration with their efforts being dwarfed by the scale of the problem.

Their desired catch are so-called butterfly mines, the most common in the area. They're only three to four inches wide, propeller shaped, and are scattered from a rocket.

They're banned by international law because of the indiscriminate way they can injure and kill civilians.

That hasn't stopped them from being used in this war.

When Serhiy helped a friend load his car with a small crane, he didn't pay much attention to a nearby apricot tree.

When he stepped towards it, he found himself falling backwards from an explosion.

"I thought maybe a tire had blown up," he recalls from his hospital bed in nearby Izyum.

"Then I looked at my foot and saw I was missing toes, the sole was shattered, there was bleeding."

Serhiy tells us his home was also destroyed from the fighting.

"I used to be healthy, walk with both of my feet, do things, drive my car.

"In an instant, I had no house and no foot."

Serhiy is under the care of Yuriy Kuznetsov, an experienced trauma surgeon. A big, framed man with a tired, yet purposeful expression.

He kept working throughout Russia's occupation last year, and was the only doctor left in the Izyum hospital. He says he treats landmine casualties every week.

"Unfortunately, in most cases, an encounter with unknown explosives ends tragically," he explains.

"Losing a limb or getting other kinds of injuries isn't the worst outcome. For instance, last week, we had two patients who discovered a mine. One is here, the other one died."

Entire wings of Yuriy's hospital are destroyed. There are windows missing along the corridor and the buildings are surrounded by mine signs.

"Before the war, just like everyone, I cared much about material things in life," says Yuriy.

"Now we understand how transient it all is. Peace and health are what matters."

Last week Ukraine's economy ministry said 724 people have been blown up by mines since the start of Russia's full-scale invasion in February last year, with 226 of them being killed.

Izyum and its surrounding area is one of the most heavily mined places, yet the picture in the city is murky.

Human Rights Watch has accused Ukraine of using illegal antipersonnel mines here. Kyiv responded by saying it followed international law while defending itself.

The organisation has previously accused Russia of using similar devices across Ukraine during its full-scale invasion.

According to the World Bank - which provides low interest loans to countries who need cash - de-mining Ukraine is going to cost $37.4bn (£30bn).

Kyiv is trying to convince as many countries as possible to help so, in its words, "it doesn't take decades".

Given how it's spent the last 70 years clearing mines from World War Two, it's an approach which will require optimism.

The cost of the Ukraine war for one Russian regiment

Kostroma is not a bad place to go looking for the effects of the Ukraine war on Russia. For this city is home to a celebrated regiment that bears its name and has been in the forefront of all the main battles in the Kremlin's campaign against its neighbours.

The 331st Guards Parachute Regiment, often called the Kostroma Airborne Regiment, has been the subject of investigations by BBC's Newsnight since shortly after last February's invasion. These have revealed the price paid by the regiment and its home community. We had confirmed 39 fatalities by April last year, 62 by late July, and now the toll has reached 94.

Much of the work compiling this list has involved combing social media accounts on V'Kontakte, the Russian equivalent of Facebook, and local media reporting. We can then cross reference this with satellite and Google Street View imagery.

One video discovered on V'Kontakte showed soldiers' graves at a cemetery north-east of Kostroma. The graves shown in the videos match the names of the soldiers we have collated.

The actual number of 331st's dead is probably much higher. Some of the soldiers are from towns outside Kostroma, which makes tracking down information about them much more difficult. Several soldiers have been reported missing - some of these may count among the dead.

When one considers those seriously wounded or taken prisoner, it's reasonable to assume that the Ukraine war has cost the regiment several hundred soldiers.

The loss of life has caused much comment in Kostroma, which lies about 300km (186 miles) north-east of Moscow and has a population of around a quarter of a million. One local website noted last spring that the entire Soviet-Afghan war, lasting nine years, had cost the city 56 soldiers. Heavy losses in Ukraine have given the local authorities a difficult task of political management.

Sergey Sitnikov, Kostroma's Kremlin-appointed governor, has been in the forefront of attempts to convince people that the city's soldiers are being properly supported. Gov Sitnikov's visits to hospitals, barracks, and indeed to the front, have been covered on local TV.

On a visit to the front in December, Gov Sitnikov told viewers that "we need to help [the] guys so they have decent conditions". He had brought with him crowd-funded care packages and commercially sold drones.

Gov Sitnikov is Vladimir Putin's placeman in his home region, so he's hardly a rebel or fearless teller of uncomfortable truths. But his willingness to visit the front and acknowledge shortcomings, even in a coded way, marks an interesting contrast with his boss.

When local TV showed mobilised paratroopers on the 331st's parade ground six months ago, it also carried Gov Sitnikov's rather frank remarks to them: "I'm wishing you good health, success, completion of all tasks… and that you return home alive."

The call-up of paratroopers, part of Russia's wider mobilisation, underlines the degree to which the Ukraine campaign has exhausted the country's professional army, of which the 331st has been a showpiece. In footage of November's parade, 150 conscripts were shown before their dispatch to the front.

The total size of the 331st regiment could be estimated at 1,500-1,700. When it first sent into Ukraine in February 2022, it deployed two battalion groups, giving a total of 1,000-1,200 soldiers. After taking heavy casualties in the failed attempt to reach Kyiv, the regiment was withdrawn and rebuilt in the southern Russian garrison town of Belgorod last summer.

Subsequent action has seen the regiment moving around all the major flashpoints - Izyum in the early summer, Kherson later on, and now back to Donbas. By monitoring the dates given in the death announcements on Kostroma social media, it's possible to work out when (and often where) the unit was used to spearhead assaults, and the lulls when it was removed from the line to lick its wounds. For example, a cluster of deaths in February point to elements of the 331st being engaged in Kreminna.

Russia's Long War

Mark Urban reports on how the Russian 331st Regiment, and their families, are coping with Vladimir Putin's long war

Each time casualty replacements - including the conscripts shown on TV in November - are brought in to replace losses, the original cadre of soldiers gets smaller, and the overall size of the unit diminishes. It may now number no more than 300-400 at the front.

The losses, and indeed the return of badly wounded men, have resonated in the home community. A few weeks into the war, one user of V'Kontake exclaimed, "Almost every day photos of our Kostroma boys get published. It sends shivers down my spine. What's happening? When will this end?"

Local media has been featuring commemorations of fallen Kostroma soldiers. In December, a TV station featured the unveiling of a plaque to Eduard Reunov, a paratrooper in the 331st who was killed in Ukraine. The style of this memorial and the language used in the report can be seen as an attempt to channel the Great Patriotic War (as the Russians call their 1941-45 fight against the Nazis), implying that today's soldiers are engaged in an equally important cause.

But on social media, we've found more modern manifestations of remembrance, and even people seeking revenge. Soldiers are shown holding shells with messages scribbled on them from Reunov's former classmates, and, supposedly, his family.

There's a trend seen in a few Russian garrison towns, for wives and mothers to post pictures of themselves with an absent soldier's uniform. One tearful mother of a dead paratrooper from the 331st remembers the Great Patriotic War, and adds, "I hope there will be stories written about our guys".

Those questioning the sacrifice tend to get short shrift. "Ukraine isn't my Motherland, our boys are dying for nothing," one person recently wrote on Kostroma's V'Kontakte page. Another swiftly countered, "That's a stupid opinion. No point in writing that stuff here".

It's evident from coverage of Gov Sitnikov's activities that the authorities are trying to mollify those who are anxious about the killed and wounded. It's not clear how much support the war has from the wider Russian public, but the video we've seen suggests there's a good deal of solidarity among military families in Kostroma.

The 331st's decline can also be measured in loss to machinery as well as personnel - particularly airborne infantry combat vehicles, known by the Russian initials BMD - that have been used up in successive battles.

Initially, when the 331st was part of an Airborne Forces task force pushing towards Kyiv, we had difficulty identifying its vehicles in video of the fighting. A painted "V" was used to identify units from all of the various units in that task force, and an inverted triangle symbol with a "3" in the centre was also used by one other regiment apart from the 331st.

As the fighting wore on, soldiers in the 331st added a further ad hoc marking to the V on their vehicles' sides - an exclamation mark painted next to the V. They may have done this precisely so their commanders could distinguish their armour from the other regiments'.

Consequently we were able to identify individual BMDs from the 331st being loaded up on railcars in March 2022, following their withdrawal from Ukraine. They then reappeared in Donbas during last summer's fighting.

Open source analysts have also identified at least 25 destroyed BMDs marked in this way, by combing Ukrainian military social media accounts. As with the dead soldiers, this visible loss does not represent the total, since many other BMDs belonging to the Kostroma regiment have likely been lost outside the view of Ukrainian troops.

A report broadcast in February 2023 by the Russian network NTV shows an "armoured group" of the 331st in action in Luhansk. But it just tends to confirm the impression we've gleaned from other sources that the regiment survives as small detachments able to spearhead certain missions. From the call signs seen on camera this element consists of just three BMD armoured vehicles.

So, the regiment's long war goes on. Of the war's wider effects on the Ukrainian population you will glean little from Russian media, nor is there any frank coverage of war-crime allegations.

The 331st were accused of massacring hundreds of Ukrainian soldiers during fighting in 2014. For many Ukrainians, the latest Russian losses may seem like nothing more than the paratroopers getting their just deserts.

Meanwhile, in Kostroma's graveyard there is plenty of evidence of the price of failure in Russia's invasion. Buried too is the regiment's reputation as "the best of the best", and its dreams of easy victory.

Phillip Schofield and Holly Willoughby: What went wrong for This Morning pair?

If a casual viewer of This Morning had turned on the show at any point last week, it's unlikely they would have noticed anything was wrong.

Phillip Schofield and Holly Willoughby were presenting as normal, with the usual revolving door of celebrity guests balanced with regular items on cooking and consumer advice.

But viewers who had been following the tabloid stories about an apparent behind-the-scenes feud between the presenters could tell something was up. There was less eye contact between the pair, less arm-touching, less general camaraderie.

On Saturday, Schofield announced he would be leaving the show after 20 years - referring directly to the "very difficult last few days".

The show had limped on throughout what we now know was Holly and Phil's last week together, as viewers and media pundits watched with interest to see if the pair could leave any personal drama at the door and still give the appearance of friendship on screen.

However, in the end everybody involved knew the headlines surrounding the increasingly strained relationship between the daytime TV's golden couple were becoming too much of a distraction. When you can't convince the viewers at home of your authenticity, the whole show crumbles.

It is worth remembering how great Schofield and Willoughby were together before their relationship went off the rails. Excellent on-screen chemistry and an easy, affectionate relationship is precisely the dynamic needed on mid-morning television.

They regularly went viral for their propensity to crack up at mishaps or sexual innuendo. One of their most famous corpses, when Gino D'Acampo told Holly "if my grandmother had wheels, she would've been a bike", has 12 million views on YouTube alone.

Viewers loved it when the pair showed up, apparently still drunk, the morning after the National Television Awards in 2016, having partied most of the night.

For all the air miles they clocked up, Schofield and Willoughby were involved in scandals only occasionally. In 2012, Schofield was deemed to have gone too far by presenting then-prime minister David Cameron with a list of alleged Conservative paedophiles he had found online.

But broadly speaking, the duo maintained a healthy relationship for well over a decade - which is no mean feat. They brought in healthy viewing figures, rarely upset the apple cart, and even went on holiday together.

The wheels began to come off as early as last September with what became known as queue-gate. When Holly and Phil visited Queen Elizabeth II's lying-in-state, their actions were interpreted by many as skipping a queue outside of up to 20 hours.

The pair had not technically done anything wrong, they were granted press access to visit the late Queen's coffin just as hundreds of other journalists had been that same week.

But because they were two of the most famous faces to have done it, there was suddenly a target on Willoughby and Schofield's backs. When other stars like David Beckham had dutifully queued outside, it was not a good look.

ITV's chief executive Dame Carolyn McCall admitted the whole affair had taken a toll on the duo. Schofield appeared to reference the backlash as he collected the best daytime trophy the National Television Awards several weeks later, telling the crowd: "This means so much to us every year, especially this year."

Unfavourable headlines and gossip continued over the following months. There was much speculation about Phillip's personal relationships since coming out as gay in 2020, and no shortage of unsubstantiated rumours surrounding the split from his wife.

But the relationship between ITV's second most popular presenting pair really appeared to turn sour in the early part of this year.

In April, Schofield's brother was found guilty of sexually abusing a boy. According to reports, Willoughby was upset that her co-star had not warned her in advance about what Timothy Schofield was accused of or that the trial was coming.

Phillip Schofield had to take time off from presenting This Morning for the duration of the court case, which is always a risk in broadcasting. There's a motto in the media industry to "never go on holiday" - in case your cover presenter is more popular than you.

Bear in mind that it is rare to see one half of a successful presenting duo without the other. Although both Schofield and Willoughby had hosted other shows without the other, when it came to This Morning they were very much a double act. They took their holidays at the same time, so the show's viewers were used to seeing them either both together, or not at all.

Sure enough, the guest presenters who temporarily took Schofield's place were hugely popular with viewers. Alison Hammond in particular worked well with Willoughby, and it was not long before fans were calling for them to host the show together permanently, sparking another flurry of media stories.

Those headlines would have put additional strain on the already fragile relationship between Schofield and Willoughby.

Last week, Schofield tried to get ahead of the feud story by releasing a statement, in which he admitted the last few weeks "haven't been easy for either of us".

That was only one sentence in a statement which otherwise praised Willoughby to the hilt ("Holly is my rock, we're the best of friends", he also said), but it was the only sentence that mattered. It was seized upon.

Willoughby was reportedly "blindsided" by the release of his statement, but kept quiet. To this day, she has not acknowledged any fallout on the record, unlike Schofield. However, certain journalists in certain newspapers seemed curiously well informed about her feelings.

This Morning itself had become the story. Liberated by the coverage, other ITV daytime presenters such as Ruth Langsford began to make jokes and comments about behind-the-scenes feuding. (Langsford previously had her own on-air clashes with Schofield.)

Twitter users noticed Willoughby had recently changed her biog to remove a previous reference to Schofield, who had introduced her to the platform. Meanwhile, stories appeared in the tabloids claiming she had made clear to bosses she would want to stay on the programme if Schofield was to exit.

By this point, the writing was on the fake digital backdrop of the Thames.

It is telling that Schofield, rather than Willoughby, has been the one to leave. They are, after all, a 50/50 partnership. If a double act has to be broken up, why should Schofield automatically be the one that has to go?

There are several reasons, but perhaps one of the most significant is their respective ages. Schofield is 61, Willoughby is 42. That is a hugely important factor in the world of broadcasting and talent management.

Given his older age, it is likely Schofield would be seen as nearer the end of his career, and therefore might be less of a priority for a TV network to hang on to.

Willoughby, on the other hand, is two decades younger, and far more ripe for poaching by other TV networks. She is very well connected in the industry herself, having hosted many non-ITV programmes including the first two seasons of The Voice UK, when it was on BBC One.

Her husband Dan Baldwin is a renowned TV producer, whose company Hungry Bear is behind big hits such as Michael McIntyre's The Wheel. At a time when Willoughby was clearly unhappy at This Morning, keeping her sweet in an attempt to stop her going to a rival broadcaster would have been a high priority for ITV bosses.

Having said that, ITV would ideally want to keep Schofield too. The broadcaster was at pains to say in their statement on Saturday that he will still host The British Soap Awards in June, as well as a brand new peak-time series on the channel.

But Willoughby will be seen as the bigger star - a balance of power which has shifted during the time the pair have worked together as she has built up her own brand.

When The Jeremy Kyle Show was removed from the ITV airwaves in 2019 following the death of a guest, bosses filled the gap in the schedule by giving an extra half hour to Good Morning Britain, and an extra half hour to This Morning.

Schofield and Willoughby's viewing figures varied between 500,000 and one million based on all kinds of factors - the time of year, that day's content, the weather outside. Many viewers dip in and out, rather than sit down to watch for the full three hours, which means it is hard to make sweeping statements about any rise or fall.

Nonetheless, there were some headlines last week about a drop in viewing figures of around 100,000, which many media outlets chalked up to the controversy. In reality, all ITV daytime shows declined last week, including Lorraine and Loose Women, likely an effect of the sunshine.

But as unfavourable media coverage continued, network chiefs would have been aware that the likely direction of travel for This Morning was downwards, and keen to pre-empt any further drop. The show relies on advertising and sponsorship to keep it afloat.

Schofield's departure appeared to be welcomed on Saturday by other TV stars who reportedly weren't fans of his, including Eamonn Holmes and Amanda Holden.

All eyes will now be on whoever is hired as Schofield's permanent replacement, to see whether he or she can build a convincing relationship with Willoughby. That is ultimately what will rescue the show.

Recent, rapid ocean warming ahead of El Niño alarms scientists

A recent, rapid heating of the world's oceans has alarmed scientists concerned that it will add to global warming.

This month, the global sea surface hit a new record high temperature. It has never warmed this much, this quickly.

Scientists don't fully understand why this has happened.

But they worry that, combined with other weather events, the world's temperature could reach a concerning new level by the end of next year.

Experts believe that a strong El Niño weather event - a weather system that heats the ocean - will also set in over the next months.

Warmer oceans can kill off marine life, lead to more extreme weather and raise sea levels. They are also less efficient at absorbing planet-warming greenhouse gases.

An important new study, published last week with little fanfare, highlights a worrying development.

Over the past 15 years, the Earth has accumulated almost as much heat as it did in the previous 45 years, with most of the extra energy going into the oceans.

This is having real world consequences - not only did the overall temperature of the oceans hit a new record in April this year, in some regions the difference from the long term was enormous.

In March, sea surface temperatures off the east coast of North America were as much as 13.8C higher than the 1981-2011 average.

"It's not yet well established, why such a rapid change, and such a huge change is happening," said Karina Von Schuckmann, the lead author of the new study and an oceanographer at the research group Mercator Ocean International.

"We have doubled the heat in the climate system the last 15 years, I don't want to say this is climate change, or natural variability or a mixture of both, we don't know yet. But we do see this change."

One factor that could be influencing the level of heat going into the oceans is, interestingly, a reduction in pollution from shipping.

In 2020, the International Maritime Organisation put in place a regulation to reduce the sulphur content of fuel burned by ships.

This has had a rapid impact, reducing the amount of aerosol particles released into the atmosphere.

But aerosols that dirty the air also help reflect heat back into space - removing them may have caused more heat to enter the waters.

What are the impacts of ocean warming?

The average surface temperature of the world's seas has increased by around 0.9C compared to preindustrial levels, with 0.6C coming in the last 40 years alone.

This is less than increases in air temperatures over the land - which have risen by more than 1.5C since preindustrial times. This is because much more energy is needed to heat water than land, and because oceans absorb heat far below their surface.

Even this seemingly small average increase has significant real-world consequences.

Loss of species: more frequent and intense marine heatwaves lead to mass mortality of sea life. This is particularly damaging for coral reefs.

More extreme weather: increased heat in the upper ocean surface means hurricanes and cyclones can pick up more energy. This means they become more intense and longer-lasting.

Sea-level rise: warmer waters take up more space - known as thermal expansion - and can greatly accelerate the melting of glaciers from Greenland and Antarctica that flow into the oceans. This raises global sea levels, increasing risks of coastal flooding.

Less ability to absorb CO2: the oceans currently take up about a quarter of greenhouse gas emissions. Warmer waters have less ability to absorb CO2. If the oceans take up less CO2 in future, more would accumulate in the atmosphere - further warming the air and oceans.

Another important factor that is worrying scientists is the weather phenomenon known as the El Niño Southern Oscillation.

For the past three years this naturally occurring event has been in a cooler phase called La Niña, and has helped keep global temperatures in check.

But researchers now believe that a strong El Niño is forming which will have significant implications for the world.

"The Australian Bureau's model does go strongly for a strong El Niño. And it has been trending that way and all the climate models have been trending that way to a stronger event," said Hugh McDowell from Australia's Bureau of Meteorology.

Mr McDowell cautioned that predictions at this point of the year are less reliable. Other researchers are more bullish.

A coastal El Niño has already developed off the shores of Peru and Ecuador and experts believe a fully formed event will follow with implications for global temperatures.

"If a new El Niño new comes on top of it, we will probably have additional global warming of 0.2-0.25C," said Dr Josef Ludescher, from the Potsdam Institute for Climate Research.

"The impact on the temperature is relaxed a few months after the peak of any El Niño so this is why 2024 will be probably the warmest on record."

"And we may, we will be close to 1.5C days and perhaps we will temporarily go over."

El Niño will likely disrupt weather patterns around the world, weaken the monsoon and threaten more wildfires in Australia.

But there are more fundamental worries that as more heat goes into the ocean, the waters may be less able to store excess energy.

And there are concerns that the heat contained in the oceans won't stay there.

Several scientists contacted for this story were reluctant to go on the record about the implications.

One spoke of being "extremely worried and completely stressed."

Some research has shown that world is warming in jumps, where little changes over a period of years and then there are sudden leaps upwards, like steps on a stairs, closely linked to the development of El Niño.

There is some hope in this scenario, according to Karina Von Schuckmann. Temperatures may come down again after the El Niño subsides.

"We still have a window where we can act and we should use this to reduce the consequences," she told BBC News.

737 Max: Boeing refutes new safety concerns

It has been called "the most scrutinised transport aircraft in history", but some critics believe Boeing's 737 Max is still not safe.

It was cleared to fly passengers again by US regulators last year, having been grounded following two catastrophic accidents.

Since then, however, a number of potentially serious problems have been reported during 737 Max flights.

Boeing insists the aircraft is both safe and reliable.

On 14 October, a 737 Max took off from Boeing Field airport in Seattle, bound for Brussels. It was a delivery flight, taking the brand-new plane to start work for its owners, the travel group Tui.

But minutes into the 5,000-mile journey, the pilots reported an urgent "flight control problem" and had to turn back. The aircraft landed safely shortly afterwards.

The issue, linked to the autopilot, was rectified relatively quickly. The plane set off for Brussels again the following day, and has been flying regularly since then.

However, this was not an isolated incident.

Emergencies

Whenever a US carrier or repair station discovers any serious failure, malfunction or defect aboard an aircraft, it has to inform the US regulator, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), via a so-called "service difficulty report".

There have been more than 180 such reports since the 737 Max returned to service.

Most faults were found on planes that were on the ground. But on 22 occasions, they occurred in-flight, and on four of those the pilots declared emergencies.

US pilots also declared emergencies on two further occasions due to engine failures. These events do not currently appear in the FAA's database, but have been reported on the Aviation Herald website, which lists accidents and incidents in commercial aviation.

The problems occurred in a US fleet that is still relatively small, with fewer than 160 aircraft delivered as of mid-October - some of which were grounded for several weeks early in the year after the discovery of electrical issues.

Service difficulty reports are also made public by the Canadian regulator, Transport Canada. Its database shows that the Canadian fleet of 56 737 Max aircraft has generated 19 reports, five of them relating to in-flight incidents.

The 737 Max remains under intense scrutiny. The plane was grounded for 20 months from March 2019, after being involved in two major accidents, in which 346 people died.

Its flight control software was modified, to remove a serious flaw implicated in both crashes. Other physical changes were made to the aircraft.

It is important to stress that none of the issues reported to the FAA and Transport Canada are directly related either to the causes of these crashes, or to the changes made afterwards.

But they do include problems with some critical systems, including the motors used to adjust the horizontal stabiliser - the wing on the tailplane of the aircraft.

There have also been faults with engines, flight control systems, hydraulics and wiring.

The horizontal stabiliser, in particular, is vital for keeping the aircraft in controlled flight.

It can be adjusted manually, using a wheel by the pilot's knee. But under certain conditions, for example if the aircraft is going too fast, that may not be possible due to the aerodynamic loads involved.

Joe Jacobsen is a former senior safety engineer at the FAA, which has been deeply critical of the way in which the agency originally certified the 737 Max.

He says the reports do give cause for concern, particularly regarding the stabiliser motors, wiring and flight control systems. Such issues, he says, are most likely to be blamed on manufacturing.

"If they are not manufacturing-related", he says "then we have a problem with the system safety analysis, as I don't believe we would have predicted this number of failures is such a short time span with such a small fleet of aircraft."

Gilles Primeau, a Canadian expert in flight control systems, is also alarmed. He has previously testified to Canadian lawmakers that in his opinion the stabiliser trim system on all 737 variants, not just the Max, is "obsolete", and does not have enough in-built redundancy in case of failures.

He says "a fundamental concept for safety-critical systems is that if the effects and severity of a failure cause a hazard, then the frequency of occurrence should be made infrequent enough by design... loss of horizontal stabiliser position can be catastrophic".

Ed Pierson is a former senior manager at Boeing's 737 plant, near Seattle, who has previously voiced serious concerns about manufacturing standards at the plant. He says the number of failure and defect reports is "very troubling".

"I'm concerned this is just the tip of the iceberg", he says, adding: "It makes one wonder what the airline's own maintenance reports say about the condition of these airplanes, if the mandatory reporting looks like this."

'Not unreasonable'

However, not all experts are so alarmed. Dai Whittingham, chief executive of the UK Flight Safety Committee, has also seen the data.

"I don't think it's an unreasonable rate of occurrences," he explains. "With a fleet that size, it's not an unexpected level of problems, for the length of time.

"They are complex systems, so these things happen"

Boeing did not respond to specific questions about the failures featured in the service difficulty reports.

In a statement, it said: "Since the 737 Max returned to service, airlines have flown nearly 240,000 flights around the world, and are conducting more than 1,300 flights every day.

"The in-service reliability is greater than 99%, and is consistent with other commercial airplane models".

People close to the 737 Max programme do, however, acknowledge that there have been specific issues with stabiliser trim motors, and that changes have been made to rectify them.

The BBC also understands that regular weekly meetings take place between the aerospace giant and representatives of the engine manufacturer CFM International, in part to address the root causes of failures and in-flight shutdowns.

The FAA, meanwhile, said: "When we returned the 737 Max to service, we noted that routine incidents would occur with the aircraft, just as they do with every other make and model of aircraft.

"The FAA addresses these issues through the same Continued Operational Safety process that we provide for the entire US commercial fleet. We have seen no reported incidents attributable to the redesigned automated flight control system on the Max."

Cairo masterplan threatens ancient City of the Dead

In the early morning haze, women dressed in black and men with grim expressions gather in Cairo's centuries-old Sayyida Nafisa cemetery.

But they are not here to bury their relatives. They are here to exhume them.

"This is a double trauma," says Iman, sobbing as she directs proceedings.

"First my mother - my mentor - passed away last year. Now I am digging up her fresh body and my grandparents' remains, putting them in sacks, and driving away to rebury them in new graves in the desert."

Iman's story is not unusual. In the past two years, the locations of several thousand graves in Historic Cairo, a Unesco World Heritage Site, have been razed. They include some in the famous City of the Dead.

The Egyptian government is clearing a wide area to make way for new main roads and flyover bridges, which it says will improve traffic flow in the sprawling, congested megacity, home to about 20 million people.

These will also connect the heart of the capital with a new administrative one being built 45km (28 miles) to the east, a flagship mega-project costing billions of dollars.

The developments are being pitched as part of an effort to modernise Egypt. Since President Abdul Fattah al-Sisi came to power in 2014, official figures show a total of 7,000km (4,350 miles) of roads and some 900 bridges and tunnels have been built across the country, with military contractors carrying out much of the work.

The authorities insist that none of the many registered monuments in this old part of Cairo, some dating back to the Arab Conquests in the 7th Century, are being damaged and that due respect is being shown to the most important tombs.

"We can't do anything to harm the graves of people we admire or against monumental areas. We build bridges to avoid this," President Sisi has said. "We should not give an opening to those who want to tarnish our efforts."

His officials say that the affected gravesites are mostly from the past century and that compensation is being given.

However, there has been a public outcry over the loss of valuable architecture and a unique cultural heritage in six historic cemeteries where Egypt's notables have long been buried, often in fancy marble tombs engraved with Arabic calligraphy.

Royals, renowned Islamic scholars, poets, intellectuals and national heroes have not been left to rest in peace.

With his white hair and professional camera, Dr Mostafa El-Sadek makes for a distinctive figure searching the rubble of the demolished graveyards with young volunteers. He is a distinguished obstetrician and university professor who has turned tomb raider.

"I'm so sorry to see the graves of Historic Cairo being removed. We can learn our history from graveyards," says Dr Sadek, who attempts to salvage headstones and other artefacts. "This is priceless. I believe these treasures should be saved."

He recounts how this month he caught a glimpse of a stone slab built into a demolished wall containing engravings in Kufic script, an early style of Arabic calligraphy, while searching in Imam Shafei cemetery, across the street from Sayyida Nafisa.

His group carefully removed the tombstone and found it had an inscription for a woman called Umamah, and dated back to the 9th Century.

"The stone was looking at me and I was looking at it. It wanted me to set it free from the wall!" says Dr Sadek fancifully. The tombstone has now been handed over to the ministry of tourism and antiquities in the hope it will go on display in a museum.

Under successive caliphates and Muslim dynasties, the dead of Cairo have been buried in this part of the city, beneath the low range of the Muqattam Hills.

In the past, each well-off family had its own walled plot with a mausoleum set in a leafy garden. Outbuildings were sometimes added to accommodate visiting relatives and were otherwise home to caretakers.

With morticians and gravediggers and their families, and later, tens of thousands of poor Egyptians, coming to live among the tombs, the City of the Dead in particular, came to house an unusual community, which is threatened by the construction.

Some residents have already taken up government offers to move away to rented apartments built on the outskirts of Cairo.

"Unfortunately, Cairo will lose a very precious heritage," says Galila el-Kadi, an architect who has studied the City of the Dead and its residents since the early 1980s, as well as the other historic cemeteries.

She does not buy the arguments by government ministries about a new masterplan for Cairo.

"They don't know what is the meaning of heritage, what is the meaning of history," she complains. "This is an environment that all past rulers have conserved in ancient times and modern times too."

Property developers have long eyed this prime real estate and, over the years, Ms Kadi has used her research to organise conferences, lobby ministers and set up petitions to try to protect the cemeteries.

This time, even an approach to Unesco has been to no avail, although the agency has expressed concern that the demolitions of tombs and road construction could have "a major impact on the historic urban fabric" of the area.

The remains of Queen Farida - the wife of King Farouk I, who was overthrown in a 1952 coup - were moved to a mosque after her tomb was destroyed.

Also pulled down was the grave of Abdullah Zuhdi, the 19th Century calligrapher whose exquisite works adorn Islam's two most revered mosques in Mecca and Medina.

There have been some limited victories, such as a recent campaign to save the tomb of the great 20th Century Egyptian novelist and intellectual, Taha Hussein, after his grave was marked with a red "x" for demolition.

However, preservationists point out that the integrity of the area is being lost because remaining tombs and monuments will sit alone below or surrounded by new roads.

"They are creating isolated islands, separated from each other," Ms Kadi says.

Now, she is devoting her efforts to building up a database of photographs and maps of the area.

"It's a very bad feeling, but me and my team, and all people who care about the heritage, all that we can do now is preserve the memory of these places," she goes on. "That's the only way to transmit it to future generations."

Back at Sayyida Nafisa cemetery, Iman remains distraught as she disinters her relatives.

She describes how her family was sent a letter asking them to act quickly after the graves were listed for demolition.

"This is a desecration of the dead. I used to find peace of mind visiting my mum buried here with my grandparents," she says. "When I was sad, I'd come here and talk to her. Plus it was my mum's final wish to be buried here with her mum and dad."

The latest round of construction affects 2,600 private graves. Besides the emotional strain, many families complain that the compensation that they are being given does not match the financial costs.

"My grandfather chose to be buried next to this Muslim saint and paid $100,000 [£80,700] in 2019 for this private burial space by Sayyida Nafisa Mosque," says a woman at another graveside, who asks for her name not to be used.

Her family has been given a new 40 sq m (431 sq ft) burial place of far less value, about 55km outside Cairo.

She says that her feelings of sorrow and bitterness about what is happening to her grandfather's plot are overlaid with despair at the scale of the destruction.

"These graveyards are just so rich in architecture and art," she adds, gesturing around her. "The government should not be demolishing them. It should be turning them into open air museums."

Vinesh Phogat at Jantar Mantar: India wrestlers risk Olympic dream for '#MeToo' protest

For Vinesh Phogat, the year 2023 was crucial in every sense.

With just three months left for the World Championships and the Asian Games, the Indian wrestler would have been at the peak of her training regime right now. She calls it the "ultimate level", the kind of training where the body begins to move automatically and you know in your bones what you have to do.

A two-time medal winner at the World Championships, this was Phogat's chance to score a third.

But instead of mentally and physically preparing at a training camp, the wrestler has been living on a dusty pavement in India's capital Delhi - where temperatures have crossed 42C - with "very little sleep" and subjected to "constant noise" for the past month.

Phogat is among a group of India's most accomplished wrestlers who have been protesting after they accused their federation's top official of sexual harassment and abuse of female wrestlers.

The wrestlers, including Olympic medallists, are demanding the resignation and arrest of the federation's president, Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh. Mr Singh, who has been questioned by the Delhi Police, has denied the allegations and called the protests politically motivated.

The protests - Tuesday marks a month since they began - jeopardise the country's prospects of winning a wrestling medal in the upcoming championships, leaving the athletes distraught and broken.

They may also end India's dreams of another Olympics wrestling medal next year. The country has won seven Olympic medals in wrestling so far, six of these since 2008.

"The entire country has pinned its hopes on us to get another medal - and we really want to - but here we are, sitting for 30 days with no resolution," says wrestler Bajrang Punia, who won a bronze at the 2020 Olympics.

Every year, the International Olympic Committee earmarks a few events as qualification events for the games. For wrestling, the World Championship in September is that event, essentially making it a gateway for the Olympics, says Rudraneil Sengupta, author of Enter the Dangal: Travels through India's Wrestling Landscape.

He adds that a world championship or a national game are also important in their own right - not just as qualifiers - as they are big events for any sport and player.

The athletes say they are continuing their training - which began in December - at the protest site but experts worry that this might not be enough.

"Wrestling is an extremely physically demanding sport. You have to be in extreme condition to be at the best level, and that requires you to be constantly in practice," Mr Sengupta says.

He adds that without the necessary conditioning, a player is likely to lose in the first 30 seconds, "no matter what their skills are".

Punia says that they have already missed out on some of the major tournaments, including an Asian ranking series, this year. "People say we are protesting for personal gains. But not getting to compete is the worst thing that could happen to a player."

On an ordinary day, the wrestlers' training would begin early - around 4-5am depending on the time zone - with some warm-up exercises. From there on, the routine looks different every day.

Some days, they practise weight training, on other days the focus is on cross-functional exercises to boost overall fitness levels. At other times, they would have trial matches to work on their technique and strategy.

"It's a very dedicated life, you do not do anything at all. You train, sleep, eat, repeat," Phogat says.

In the first few months of training for a competition, wrestlers build up their strength to be able to withstand the "brutal level" that awaits them. Mr Sengupta calls this "a time of focused intensity", one that requires the athletes to concentrate only on discipline. Every part of the body needs to be strong, from physical power and mental well-being to technique. And every move, grunt and gasp is monitored to achieve that.

In the next few months, a wrestler's body performs at the absolute limit of strength - what is called "explosive power", which means projecting the maximum amount of strength in the minimum amount of time, Mr Sengupta says. This can be achieved only in very short bursts. And then there is the last month before the competition, where the body is given time to rest and recover.

Punia says this is important as it gives the body time to heal from injuries.

Given that the Asian Games and the World Championships are both in September, Mr Sengupta says the best scenario would be for the protests to be called off by the next week so that the wrestlers can go back into "absolute full training".

"But even if they get three odd months of dedicated wrestling training, it still might not be enough to get them into the kind of conditioning they need to win," he adds.

It's a fear that haunts the athletes too as they continue protesting in Delhi.

Surrounded by hundreds of police officers and supporters, they hunker down inside a canopied structure made of blue tarpaulin sheets that serves as a tent.

The athletes are accessible through the day, meeting people, giving speeches and interviews. But at dawn - when most supporters are asleep - they briefly transition into wrestlers again.

Heaving with fatigue and with sweat dripping off their foreheads, they train for an hour or two at a nearby centre. During practice, they remain dedicated and say they are still planning to compete. But they are also frustrated.

The time they get here is nothing compared with the dedicated hours of training at camp - and sometimes even this is interrupted by eager supporters. "In our hearts we know this level of training might not be enough but we are trying to do what we can," Phogat says.

Their living conditions are also far from perfect, making it harder to maintain focus.

"Even training camp life is hard. But that's the life we know," says Sakshi Malik, the first Indian woman to win an Olympic wrestling medal in 2016. "But living here, with no proper food or sleep and hardly any rest, is something we never thought we'd have to do."

Punia adds that the point is not losing, it's about being able to give their best shot.

"But how do we do that when we cannot train properly?" he asks.

From a sporting point of view, Mr Sengupta says that the wrestlers' inability to compete might not completely dampen India's prospects as the country still has a pool of talented wrestlers who can be trained.

"But the point is that this protest is about justice and why due process was not followed for such serious allegations," he adds.

The wrestlers, too, admit they feel "rather dispensable", but say that they will continue protesting until their demands are met even if their careers suffer.

"It's not a wrestler's job to speak out. Our job is to train, play and win. But speaking out is our responsibility and we'll keep at it," says Malik.

For Phogat though, it will still be a hard pill to swallow. "Because we could've done it, won that medal," she says.

"We were at our best and not getting to play at our peak will leave us all a little dead inside."

Deaths raise fresh fears over cow vigilantism in India

On a cold morning in January, a car smashed into a van in Tauru, a small town in the northern Indian state of Haryana.

Inside the car were three young Muslim men: Waris, Nafiz and Shaukeen.

Waris is now dead. Nafiz is in jail. And Shaukeen is yet to come to terms with the horrors of the night.

Shaukeen alleges that his friend was beaten to death by a group of Hindu men after they spotted a cow trussed up in the back of the car.

The 26-year-old claims the cow belonged to Nafiz, who was taking it back to his home in Haryana from Bhiwadi district in neighbouring Rajasthan state. Shaukeen and Waris were accompanying him when they were chased by a group of cow vigilantes. These are Hindu men - mostly armed with sticks and other weapons - who keep a watch for vehicles transporting cattle to prevent cow slaughter, which is illegal in many Indian states.

The police, however, say that there were no visible injury marks on Waris's body.

"We were informed about the road accident by a truck driver and some gau rakshaks [cow protectors]. When we reached the spot, the three men were inside the car. We took them to a nearby hospital. One of them died of his injuries later," said Varun Singla, superintendent of police in Haryana's Nuh district, where Tauru is located.

He added that the van, which was carrying vegetables, had also been damaged. "The driver was unscathed but his son, who was on the passenger seat, suffered minor injuries."

Police arrested Nafiz and Shaukeen on cow smuggling charges because they "found a cow in the car", Mr Singla says.

But Shaukeen, who is now out on bail, says that their car hit the van only because they were being chased by a vehicle which belonged to the cow vigilantes.

The BBC has accessed CCTV footage of the crash in Tauru. It shows a four-by-four with a siren on its roof approaching the car moments after the accident.

Then, according to a video filmed by a local man who was at the spot, a group of men who appeared to be armed with weapons, including guns, pulled out the cow from the car's boot and bundled the three Muslim men into the four-by-four.

Shaukeen alleges he and his companions were then beaten up by the gang, who later took them to hospital and that Waris died on the way.

"Waris did not die in the accident. There was not a single injury from the crash," he says, adding that it was a "targeted killing" against Muslims.

The cow is worshipped by millions of Hindus, who are the majority of India's population. While cow slaughter was already a sensitive topic and banned in some states, it has become a hotly debated issue since Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) came to power nationally in 2014.

The BJP-led state governments have cracked down heavily on cow slaughter. Sale and consumption of beef is now illegal in about two-thirds of India's 28 states, most of them governed by the BJP, including Haryana. Cow vigilante groups have been accused of enforcing this ban through violence, often leading to assaults and even lynchings of mostly Muslim meat sellers and cattle traders.

Mr Modi has criticised these groups in the past but several high-profile assaults have occurred even after that.

At Waris's home in Nuh, his family is still grappling with the shock of his death.

"If someone is committing a crime, any crime, the police should punish them," says Imran, Waris' elder brother.

He questions why vigilante groups in the state were "given the right to take the law in their own hands".

But Ravi Kiran, an inspector general of Haryana police, told the BBC that a post mortem report confirmed that Waris's death had been caused by the crash. He added that the police were willing to investigate the matter further if they got any new information on the case.

Shaukeen alleges that a man named Monu Manesar, a well-known cow vigilante who regularly uploaded videos of himself questioning cattle transporters, was the leader of the men who assaulted them. On the day of the incident, Mr Manesar had live-streamed a video of Waris and his friends being "interrogated" by himself and some other men. In the video, which has now been deleted from Mr Manesar's Facebook profile, the Muslim men had visible injuries on their face.

"Monu was saying 'beat them' and everyone was hitting us. It was all done at the direction of Monu," Shaukeen alleged.

The BBC couldn't contact Mr Manesar, who is currently wanted for questioning by police in another case of alleged cow vigilantism. But in a BBC interview in January he had denied any involvement in Waris's death.

He claimed that his group had been informed that a cow was being loaded into a car and reached the spot, only to see the vehicle speed away.

"I reached the site of the crash after about 35 minutes. I saw two police cars. The men in the car were slightly hurt so I told people to give water to them. The police later took them to the hospital," he said, adding that he only heard about Waris's death hours after the crash.

Imran alleged that his brother's death was part of a larger pattern of violent assaults by cow vigilante groups.

He connected Waris's death to another high-profile case - the murders of two Muslim men, Junaid and Nasir - that made headlines in India a few weeks later.

The charred bodies of Junaid and Nasir were found in a burnt vehicle in Haryana's Bhiwani district in February. Their relatives have alleged they were killed by members of a Hindu hardline group who, according to media reports, accused them of cow smuggling. Five men, including Mr Manesar, were named in the police complaint but police have said that only three suspects have been arrested so far.

The BBC visited Junaid and Nasir's family in Bharatpur in Rajasthan.

"His body was brought in a bag. It was ashes. There was nothing, just a handful of ashes and a few bones," said Junaid's wife Sajida, wiping away tears.

She said she was worried about how she would look after their six children alone.

The deaths had sparked protests by Muslims in Bharatpur, who alleged that cow protection laws were being used to target them.

"Everyone is afraid. The fear is that they might pick you up. They pick up anyone, take them away, beat them, then they accuse them of anything like cow smuggling or transportation," alleged Mahmur, Nasir's older brother.

More than a hundred miles away, in Haryana's Manesar town, a group of men who identified themselves as cow protectors gathered at a sprawling shelter.

The BBC spoke to many of them, who claimed that they worked with the police and acted within the limits of the law. Some of them said that they, too, were sometimes attacked when on patrol.

"If there is a woman in the market and we see someone misbehaving, should we wait for the police?" asks Dharminder Yadav, who was the local cow protection group leader before Mr Manesar took over.

Mr Yadav denied allegations of Muslims being targeted. "Our laws say that we need to protect cows. Whatever our law says, it's our duty to follow. Our enemy is the cow smuggler and not just Muslims," he said.

Shaukeen claims he is now too scared to step out of his house.

"Waris is dead and I don't want to be killed like him."

Kalakshetra: Sex harassment claims shake top India dance academy

One of India's pre-eminent art and cultural institutions, Kalakshetra, has been embroiled in an ugly row over allegations of sexual harassment against a faculty member and three repertory artists who work as substitute teachers at the prestigious dance academy.

At the centre of the controversy is a college run by Kalakshetra, the Rukmini Devi College of Fine Arts, famous for teaching Bharatanatyam, a classical dance form.

Last week, police arrested assistant professor and accomplished dancer Hari Padman after a former student lodged a complaint accusing him of sexual harassment.

It came after days of protests by more than 200 students of the institute, located in the city of Chennai in the southern state of Tamil Nadu. They alleged that sexual harassment had been going on at the campus for years and accused the administration of ignoring their complaints.

In a short statement on its website, the Kalakshetra Foundation - which is an autonomous institution under India's culture ministry - blamed "vested interests" for trying to "sully" its reputation.

But after the scandal made headlines, the foundation announced a three-member panel, led by a retired high court judge, to investigate the allegations. It also suspended Hari Padman and said the services of the three repertory artists had been "dispensed with pending inquiry".

"As the inquiry is in progress, it will be inappropriate to make any comment on the incidents mentioned in your mail," it told the BBC in an email.

The Tamil Nadu State Commission for Women has also launched an inquiry into the allegations.

Before his arrest, Hari Padman had denied the allegations against him in meetings with college authorities. He also told a TV channel that he would make every effort to seek justice.

"There are hundreds of students studying in Kalakshetra. Ask them if I ever misbehaved with them or misspoke. I have never abused anybody. I stand by my conscience and I know they do not have a shred of evidence," he told News18, adding that he would rely on CCTV footage to prove his innocence.

His wife has also defended him and lodged a counter-complaint against the complainant and two of Kalakshetra's teachers, accusing them of levelling false charges against her husband out of "jealousy and professional rivalry".

Divya Hari Padman said the charges against her husband were "an act of revenge" because he had "chided" some students for bad behaviour and that the two teachers had "instigated" the former student to lodge the complaint.

Kalakshetra is often described as "the IIT of fine arts" - drawing a comparison with India's premier technology institutes that are extremely tough to get into. Students who earn an engineering degree from there are sought after globally.

Similarly, Kalakshetra brings name and fame to its students, helps them earn well and gives them opportunities to perform across the world.

Many students told the BBC that it had been their life's dream to join the dance academy and that they felt on top of the world when they were accepted.

But they now say that harassment from some teachers has led them to doubt their self-worth.

The BBC spoke to a dozen students, teachers, former students and other staff and heard claims of alleged abuse suffered by young dancers. All of them spoke on condition of anonymity because the alleged abusers are famous and accomplished dancers.

Many of the complainants alleged a lack of freedom at Kalakshetra, verbal abuse, body shaming and caste discrimination. Some students said they were told to lose weight, others alleged they were not given important roles and discriminated against for their darker complexion.

But the most alarming allegations were about sexual harassment - both male and female students have complained of inappropriate touches and receiving lewd messages - and, they claimed, the authorities' refusal to take complaints seriously.

One former student told the BBC that she was harassed and her grades fell when she resisted a teacher's advances.

"He sent me a friend request on social media. When I didn't accept it, he kept pestering me, asking why couldn't I accept him as a friend," she said.

"Finally when I accepted his request, he started sending me lewd texts. They were so bad that I could not even share them with my close friends. After I unfriended him, he started to treat me badly," she said, alleging that her grades plummeted after her falling out with him.

A male student narrated a similar story of harassment at the hands of a different teacher.

"At midnight, he sent me a 'good night' message. When I replied, he asked if I was alone and if he could come over. I was shocked. He then asked for a video call so that he could see me 'fully'. He continued sending lewd messages. I could not handle this, I fell ill," he said, adding that the harassment increased after he complained to the authorities.

"The administration did nothing about it and it further emboldened the harasser. It also prevented more students from coming forward to complain," he said.

Lawyer BS Ajeetha, who was an external member of the institute's internal complaints committee (ICC) for sexual harassment since 2018 and quit recently, says the allegations against Hari Padman first surfaced in December in a now-deleted Facebook comment.

Leela Samson, one of India's best-known dancers and a former director of Kalakshetra, had accused an unnamed teacher of "molesting students" and alleged that "he was in an inappropriate relationship with a female student". She also warned parents against sending their daughters to an institute peopled by "sexual predators".

Although the post did not name the teacher, Hari Padman and the female student were named later in the comments. Both denied that there was anything inappropriate about their relationship.

Ms Ajeetha, who was part of the ICC when it investigated the case, said "the student condemned the way her name was dragged into the controversy and said her relationship with Hari Padman was one of teacher and student. The case was closed because the female student denied any accusations of harassment".

But since then, many students have come forward to level serious allegations against Hari Padman and the three repertory artists. Groups of students and alumni have also come to defend the institution and its teachers. Some have even suggested that the "anonymous allegations" against Hari Padman were "false and politically motivated".

The ICC considered some other allegations too - one from a former female student accusing Hari Padman of "shouting at her and removing her from a dance show" and another from three male students who'd alleged sexual harassment by other teachers.

Ms Ajeetha says the ICC couldn't do anything in these cases because India's sexual harassment law is gender specific and allows ICC to only take up cases of women and only those cases that have explicit allegations of sexual harassment.

"We forwarded the complaints to the management, advising them to take "stringent action" against the teachers involved. But the administration did not deal properly with the students," she added.

One student said they were taught to tolerate everything and many fell in line because it's a very close community of artists and young students fear that speaking out could affect their careers.

For the moment, he says, they have paused their protests and are busy writing their semester exams.

"We called off the agitation after the institute's governing body assured us that our grievances would be looked into and action would be taken against our abusers," he said.

Gundecha Brothers: Famous Indian music gurus accused of sexual assault

Her discomfort and nervousness is palpable, even across the Zoom screen. Monica's name has been changed to protect her identity because she fears reprisal. But she is keen to share her story.

She alleges that she was raped by the late Ramakant Gundecha, a famous classical Indian musician, while she was a student at his school, Dhrupad Sansthan, in the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh.

Gundecha died in November 2019 but he and his brothers, Umakant and Akhilesh, have since been accused of sexual harassment and assault by female students of the music school. Over the course of a three-month investigation, the BBC has heard multiple allegations against all three Gundecha brothers. Umakant and Akhilesh deny the allegations.

Ramakant was and Umakant still is a famous exponent of Dhrupad, one of the oldest genres of Hindustani music, while Akhilesh is a percussionist. In 2012, Ramakant and Umakant received the Padma Shri, India's fourth-highest civilian award for their contribution to music.

Dhrupad Sansthan, the prestigious school they founded and taught at, has attracted hundreds of students, foreign and Indian, from across the globe. It claims to have accreditation from Unesco's Intangible Cultural Heritage Committee. But the Unesco told the BBC that it had no links to the school and said it will be sending a 'cease and desist' notice demanding the withdrawal of such claims.

The allegations against the brothers have sent shockwaves through the classical music world, where they enjoy fame and status. The allegations have also shone a spotlight on an ancient tradition, the guru-shishya parampara - an informal contract by which the student is usually expected to completely surrender to the will of the teacher.

Allegations against the the three brothers range from sharing flirtatious and sexually suggestive messages to exposing themselves during class to molestation and, in the case of Ramakant, even rape.

Monica said she was in her first week at the school when she began receiving inappropriate WhatsApp messages from Ramakant. She alleged that one evening he drove her to a dark car park and molested her in the backseat of his car.

"He started kissing me. I pushed him away but he kept trying," she said. "He touched my body and tried to unclothe me. At that time, I realised I was not moving. I was like a stone. At one point he realised that I was not responding. So he asked me, should I drop you back at the school? But I couldn't even reply."

Monica said she wanted to erase the memory of the incident. She didn't leave the school immediately because she loved the music and was keen to pursue it further. She had left her job and invested all her money to study at the school.

But then three months later, she alleged, Ramakant raped her. "[He] entered the room, pulled my pants off and forcefully had sex with me. And when he had finished he just left. I went to the door and bolted it. And for three days, I didn't eat," she said.

Sarah, another student at the school, whose name has also been changed, told the BBC that she was molested by Akhilesh Gundecha.

"I got sick when I was there and was hospitalised," she said. "Akhilesh came to take me back to the school. He sat next to me in the car and started touching my hands. I pulled them away. It felt very strange."

In total, five women told the BBC they had witnessed abuse and harassment on the Dhrupad Sansthan campus. Some said that when they rebuffed sexual advances from Ramakant Gundecha, he lost interest in teaching them. They also alleged that if a student complained, she was often publicly humiliated in class.

Rachel Fairbanks, a primary school teacher who now lives in Seattle, said the abuse began on her first day at the school in March 2017. She alleged that she was cornered by a campus driver who'd come to drop off her luggage in her room.

"I thought he was going to hurt me. So I asked Ramakant to step in," she said.

But instead of helping, she alleged, he began molesting her. She accused him of attempting to kiss her and repeatedly texting her, professing his love. On one occasion, she alleged, he drove her outside the campus to an abandoned field late at night, pulled her pants down and touched her vagina.

"I pushed him off. He drove me back to a small town, which is right outside of the school," she said. "And then I had to walk back in the dark through the town and through the fields, back to the school. I left the school soon after that happened. I couldn't even sit in Ramakant's presence anymore."

Rachel, who didn't want to remain anonymous, said she had found the strength to speak up now, several years later, only after similar allegations came to light in a Facebook post shared by a group called 'Dhrupad Family Europe' in September 2020.

Through their lawyers, both Akhilesh and Umakant Gundecha denied all of these allegations, stating that "vested interests" from outside the student community were trying to "further their agenda of causing damage to the art and reputation of the Gundecha Brothers and Dhrupad Sansthan".

But the charges are also being investigated by an internal complaints committee over the last four months. Indian law mandates every institution to set up a panel to address complaints of sexual harassment or assault.

Students say the committee at Dhrupad Sansthan was formed only after they put pressure on the school. Former students, who are part of a support group for the survivors, have also alleged that they have received threats on multiple occasions for speaking out in support. Survivors are bound by law not to disclose the results of the investigation.

Although this is the first time #MeToo movement has touched the world of Hindustani classical music, many say this reckoning was overdue.

While many classical musicians say retaining the rigours of the teacher-student relationship is fundamental to learning the ancient form, several others told the BBC that there was still a need to recognise that it's an easy vehicle for exploitation.

"The guru (teacher) expects complete submission, complete subservience from the student," said Neela Bhagwat, a 79-year-old vocalist. "If it's a male student the surrender is less. If it's a female student, the surrender is more. I think this makes female students very vulnerable," she said.

Bhagwat said she often composed her own lyrics because of the inherent misogyny in traditional compositions.

TM Krishna, a famous classical musician of the Carnatic form, has gone to the extent of suggesting that the guru-shishya tradition be demolished entirely.

"Like most relationships, the guru-shishya relationship is grounded in a power imbalance, but here, crucially, the inequality is celebrated," he wrote in the Indian Express newspaper recently after allegations against the Gundechas emerged.

"No doubt there will be claims that I seek to destroy something ancient. But a storied past must never be a defence against criticism."

Both Krishna and Bhagwat argue that there's a need to humanise the guru, and treat him like an expert in his field, rather than a god who can do no wrong.

"In the wake of the recent accusations, has anyone even thought of contacting the institutions - and there must be hundreds of them in the country - to do an audit on whether they have a valid internal compliance committee already in place?" said Shubha Mudgal, a popular vocalist whose repertoire includes classical and Indie-pop music.

Bhagwat, Krishna and Mudgal are rare exceptions in a fraternity that has largely remained silent. And many also wonder how much of an impact the allegations will have on the careers of the two remaining Gundecha brothers.

Akhilesh Gundecha, for instance, was invited to perform at the prestigious Tansen Samaroh 2020 festival, before being dropped following a social media backlash.

The students who spoke to the BBC said a lack of faith in the Indian judiciary's ability to deliver justice was a key reason why they were not pursuing a legal course. Their future course of action is unclear, particularly because most have now left India.

Most of the women said they wanted some closure from the investigating committee's findings, along with a public apology from the Gundechas. But that has not happened yet.

Rachel said she saw no point in the investigation if its findings couldn't be made public. She said what continued to hurt is that her experience also spelled the end of her relationship with Dhrupad.

"I have my tanpura [an Indian musical instrument] in the living room right now and it's going to be sold," she said. "I unfortunately can't sing without having flashbacks."

Malyana riots: India Muslim victims despair after court order

The recent order of a trial court in the northern Indian state of Uttar Pradesh, setting free 41 Hindu men accused of religious violence against Muslims 36 years ago, has plunged the survivors and families of victims into despair.

The violence on 23 May 1987 in Malyana village on the outskirts of Meerut town, in which 72 Muslims were massacred, allegedly by local Hindus and members of the state's armed police force, has been described as a "blot on Indian democracy". And critics say Friday's sessions court order is "a travesty of justice".

Vibhuti Narain Rai, a former director general of the Uttar Pradesh police, described it as a "total failure on the part of the state".

"The victims have been miserably failed by all the stakeholders - the police, the political leadership, a partisan press, and now the judiciary," he told the BBC.

Mr Rai, along with senior journalist Qurban Ali who'd extensively covered the riots, and a couple of survivors of the massacre, had petitioned the Allahabad high court in 2021 complaining about the slow pace of the proceedings.

"The investigation had been faulty from the start and the trial was pending for three-and-a-half decades so we petitioned the high court to order a fresh investigation, hold a fair trial and pay compensation to the victims," Mr Rai said.

Mr Ali said one of their demands was to revisit the role of the police in the carnage. Survivors allege that the violence was started by members of the state's Provincial Armed Constabulary (PAC) - a police force created to deal with insurgencies and religious and caste conflicts.

Civil liberties organisations, including Amnesty International, have documented the PAC's involvement in the Malyana riots. Mr Ali also points out that "post-mortem reports submitted in court of at least 36 bodies show bullet wounds" - at a time when villagers had no access to guns.

The BBC reached out to the PAC for their response to allegations of involvement in the Malyana violence. A senior official said he was "not competent enough to talk about the case". An email has also been sent to the head of the force.

In the complaint registered by police after the killings, only 93 local Hindus were named as accused - 23 died during the trial and 31 "could not be traced".

Defence lawyer Chhotey Lal Bansal told the BBC that the prosecution case fell through because the main witness said he had "named the accused under police pressure" and that "police had included names of four people who had died seven-eight years before the carnage and one man who was gravely ill and in hospital".

"What happened to Malyana's Muslims was very painful and was highly condemnable. But my clients were also victims, living under threat of prosecution for 36 years," he said.

"Both the defence and the prosecution repeatedly blamed the police and the PAC for the killings, but their names were not included," he added.

The 26-page judgement has distressing details of violence narrated in court - a young man killed when a bullet pierced his neck, a father cut into pieces with swords, a five-year-old thrown into a fire.

So the judgement has shocked the survivors of the violence and members of victim's families.

Vakeel Ahmed Siddiqui, who carries scars from two bullet wounds, says "gloom has descended on the community in Malyana".

"I know all those who died and all those who killed," he tells me, adding that he weeps every time he talks about 23 May 1987.

For some days, he says, anti-Muslim rumours had been swirling around in their village and attempts were being made to create animosity between the two communities.

"Meerut had been a powder keg for years and had seen riots, but we didn't think there would be any violence in our village. But on that day, PAC personnel arrived in three vehicles and surrounded Muslim areas, shutting down all exit routes," he says.

"Some entered Muslim homes and others took position on rooftops of Hindu homes. Bullets were raining from all sides," he says.

Mr Siddiqui was among a handful of witnesses who was called to testify in court.

"I gave evidence over a year, I told them about the PAC's role, identified the men and the weapons they were carrying."

The judgement, he says, has "disappointed everyone" in Malyana.

"I think there was enough evidence to pin the guilt. We must find out where we went wrong. When Malyana was set on fire, the smoke was seen by the entire world. How could the court not see it?" he asks.

Mohammad Ismail lost 11 members of his family in the massacre, including his grandfather, parents, seven younger siblings and a cousin. The oldest victim, his grandfather, was around 85; the youngest was his sister, a toddler. He survived because he was travelling.

News of the killings reached Mohd Ismail the day after, but he could visit his village only "four-five days later because Meerut was sealed and a curfew was imposed". What he saw on his return, he says, still haunts him.

"Our house was burnt, the walls were splattered with blood. Some of my Muslim neighbours who had survived had been moved to a nearby madrassa [a religious school."

Mohd Ismail says even though riots were being reported from other parts of Meerut, his family didn't think that they would be targeted. "We had no animosity with anyone, so we were not worried."

Mr Ali, the journalist, told me that when he visited the village two days after the massacre, he found a place that was "devastated… it looked haunted".

"Most Muslim residents had either died or were in hospital being treated for injuries, including bullets wounds, or run away."

The violence in Malyana that summer, he said, was not an isolated incident.

Religious tensions had begun in Meerut weeks earlier after riots broke out on 14 April during a religious procession.

A dozen people, including Hindus and Muslims, were killed and a curfew was imposed, but tensions remained and riots continued to break out sporadically over the next several weeks.

According to official records, 174 people were killed - but unofficial reports say more than 350 people died and property worth billions of rupees was destroyed.

Initially, Mr Rai says, "both sides suffered casualties, but it later became organised violence against Muslims by the police and PAC".

On 22 May, a day before the Malyana massacre, PAC personnel had descended on Hashimpura, a Muslim-dominated locality just 6km away.

They took away 48 men - 42 were shot dead and their bodies were thrown into a river and a canal. Six survived and lived to tell the tale.

Photojournalist Praveen Jain, who was beaten up and told to leave by the police, hid in the bushes and took pictures of Muslim men being assaulted and being marched through the streets.

"When I left, I didn't know that they were going to be killed," he told the BBC.

In 2018, the Delhi high court convicted 26 former PAC personnel for abducting and killing Muslims in Hashimpura and sentenced them to life imprisonment.

Sharat Pradhan, a senior journalist in the state capital Lucknow, remembers the PAC being widely criticised for being "communal and anti-Muslim".

"Most of its personnel came from Hindu backgrounds and - unlike in the army - they were not trained in secularism."

Mr Pradhan says the fact that justice was delivered in the Hashimpura massacre was mostly due to the efforts of Mr Rai who in 1987 was the superintendent of police in Ghaziabad where the bodies of the murdered men - and a survivor - had turned up.

Mr Ali says he hopes that some day, justice will also be delivered in the Malyana case.

"We are going to challenge the decision in the high court. We won't give up," he tells me. "This is a case where justice is not just delayed, it's also been denied."

Beaten and humiliated by Hindu mobs for being a Muslim in India

Unprovoked attacks on Muslims by Hindu mobs have become routine in India, but they seem to evoke little condemnation from the government.

Last month, a video that went viral on social media showed a terrified little girl clinging to her Muslim father as a Hindu mob assaulted him.

The distressing footage showed the 45-year-old rickshaw driver being paraded through the streets of Kanpur, a city in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, as his crying daughter begged the mob to stop hitting him.

His attackers asked him to chant "Hindustan Zindabad" or "Long Live India" and "Jai Shri Ram" or "Victory to Lord Ram" - a popular greeting that's been turned into a murder cry by Hindu lynch mobs in recent years.

He complied, but the mob still kept hitting him. The man and his daughter were eventually rescued by the police. Three men arrested for the attack were freed on bail a day later.

A few days later, another viral video surfaced showing a Muslim bangle-seller being slapped, kicked and punched by a Hindu mob in Indore, a city in the central state of Madhya Pradesh. The attackers could be heard abusing Tasleem Ali and telling him to stay away from Hindu areas in future.

In a police complaint, he later alleged that he had been "beaten by five-six men who hurled communal slurs at him for selling bangles in a Hindu-dominated area and robbed him of money, his phone and some documents".

But in a strange turn of events, Ali himself was arrested the next day after the 13-year-old daughter of one of his alleged attackers accused him of molesting her. His family and neighbours have strongly denied the accusation. They said it was inconceivable that the father of five would do something like that.

And eyewitnesses, quoted in the Indian press, said he was attacked because of his religious identity and the molestation accusation against him seemed to be an afterthought.

The two attacks were among several instances of anti-Muslim violence in August, but the last month by no means was cruellest for India's biggest religious minority group, with a population of more than 200 million.

Similar attacks were reported in the preceding months too - and many made headlines.

In March, a 14-year-old Muslim boy who had entered a Hindu temple to drink water was violently assaulted

In June, a vendor was beaten up in Delhi for trying to sell fruit in a Hindu locality

"The violence is overwhelming. It's rampant and common and also very acceptable," says Alishan Jafri, a freelance journalist who's been documenting attacks on Indian Muslims for the past three years.

He says he comes across "three-four such videos every day" but is able to verify only one or two which he then shares on social media.

Religious faultlines have existed in India for a long time but, critics say, anti-Muslim violence has risen since 2014 under the Hindu nationalist government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

"Communal violence is not a recent phenomenon, but it grows in sync with the strategies of those in power and political mobilisation," Prof Tanvir Aeijaz, who teaches politics science at Delhi University, told the BBC.

"The distrust was always there but cleavages have been sharpened now by religious nationalism and ethno-nationalism."

During Mr Modi's first term in power, there were numerous incidents of Muslims being attacked by so-called "cow vigilantes" over rumours that they had eaten beef, or that they were trying to smuggle cows - an animal many Hindus consider holy - for slaughter.

The prime minister did not condone such attacks, but was criticised for not condemning them quickly or strongly enough either.

Prakash Javadekar, a senior BJP leader, told the BBC that "the government believes that lynching is bad, wherever it happens. But law and order is a state subject and it is their responsibility to deal with it".

He then went on to accuse the media of "biased and selective journalism" by focusing on attacks on Muslims.

"If you look at official data, there were 160 Hindus among the 200 people who were lynched. People of all faiths were targeted," he said, but did not give details of where the data could be found. India does not gather such data.

In 2019, a fact-checker website that counted "hate crimes" in India reported that more than 90% of victims in the past 10 years were Muslims.

And the perpetrators of the attacks remain unpunished amid accusations that they enjoy political patronage from Mr Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party after a government minister garlanded eight Hindus convicted for lynching a Muslim.

"Such attacks have become so common in our country today only and only because of the impunity these thugs enjoy," says Hasiba Amin, a social media co-ordinator for the opposition Congress party.

"Today hate has gone mainstream. It is cool to go attack Muslims. The hate mongers are also rewarded for their actions."

Critics say since Mr Modi's return to power for a second term in 2019, the anti-Muslim violence has expanded in its scope.

Sometimes, the violence is not even physical and takes a more subtle, insidious form that appears aimed at vilifying and demonising the minority community. For example:

Last year, as Covid-19 began to take hold of India, Hindu leaders, including Mr Modi's ministers and party colleagues, accused Muslim men, who had attended a religious gathering in Delhi, of "corona jihad" by indulging in behaviour that would spread the virus

Then followed "roti jihad" which included wild allegations that Muslim cooks were spitting on roti - handmade bread - to spread the virus to Hindus

In recent months, several states have introduced laws to curb "love jihad" - an Islamophobic term fringe Hindu groups use to imply that Muslim men prey on Hindu women to convert them to Islam through marriage.

The laws are being used to harass and jail Muslim men in interfaith relations with Hindu women. Last December, the plight of a pregnant Hindu woman, who was forcibly separated from her Muslim husband, made headlines when she suffered a miscarriage.

Muslim women haven't been spared either - in July, dozens of them found they had been put up "for sale" online. In May, many of them, including Ms Amin of the Congress party, were offered in a mock online "auction".

And last month, participants at a rally, organised by a former BJP leader in Delhi, shouted slogans calling for Muslims to be killed.

"It's a very sustained, organised campaign by nationalist politicians to radicalise Hindus into believing that Muslims need to be marginalised if Hindus are to progress," says Mr Jafri.

Prof Aeijaz says the attack on working class Muslims, such as tailors, fruit vendors, electricians, plumbers and bangle sellers, is also an attempt to take control of the political economy and jobs through religious nationalism.

"The religious divide has deepened. The distrust has deepened. But the hate is also for profit. The idea it to make Muslims the other, the enemy.

"The process of creating the other is by propagating the idea that if we don't destroy the other, we will be destroyed. So you stoke hate, create fear, and violence is part of this larger narrative."

But religious nationalism, Prof Aeijaz says, is a dangerous idea that can lead to sectarian violence.

"The buck stops with the political executive in a parliamentary democracy. How long can they look the other way?"

Women describe Police Scotland 'boys club' culture

Four women have spoken to BBC Newsnight about allegations of a "boys club" culture at all levels of Police Scotland, the UK's second largest force.

The women, who include a former assistant chief constable, described a culture of misogyny that failed to properly address their concerns.

They say other women, still working in the force, are too frightened to come forward.

Three of the women have spoken before about their experiences but have banded together because they feel their stories have been lost and there has been no measurable change in attitudes towards female staff in Police Scotland.

In May last year, Rhona Malone won almost £1m in compensation from Police Scotland after an employment tribunal found she had been victimised when she had raised concerns about sexism within the force.

Ms Malone had been a police officer for eight years when she decided to join the firearms unit in Edinburgh.

"It was a huge challenge for any police officer, not just for a woman," she told Newsnight.

At first it was great and the training was amazing, she said, but then she started to see some "horrific behaviour".

She says that when she challenged that behaviour, she was wrongly accused of throwing her utility belt with a loaded firearm.

The final straw was an email in 2018 from her senior officer which said two female firearms officers should not be working together when there were male staff on duty.

In the email he said "other than the obvious differences in physical capacity, it makes more sense from a search, balance of testosterone perspective".

Ms Malone said it was not easy for her to put in a grievance.

"The minute you do that you have a target on your back," she said.

"It was like Russian Roulette. Either put a grievance in and lose my career, or don't put in the grievance, and then I lose my career because I'm getting accused of throwing weapons, which didn't happen."

After a long, drawn-out process she won her case and received substantial compensation which was mostly swallowed up in legal costs.

"Ultimately it didn't just take my career, it took my mental health as well," she said.

"I'm really sad about that because I loved my job."

Angela Wilson, the former assistant chief constable of Tayside Police, was one of the officers who openly criticised Police Scotland over Ms Malone's case.

She said it smacked of misogyny and bullying towards female officers who are trained exactly the same as their male counterparts.

Ms Wilson said her own 30-year career was derailed by her attempts to change the internal culture.

The former assistant chief constable, who took early retirement in 2013, said women who complained internally were shut down and made to look like troublemakers.

She called for a judge-led inquiry into Police Scotland's sexism and misogyny.

Police Scotland has just under 17,000 officers, with roughly a third being women.

It was formed in 2013 when the existing eight regional forces were merged.

All the women Newsnight spoke to cited the creation of Police Scotland as a major problem.

Ms Wilson said: "The stories I'm hearing from people do seem to be exacerbated now it's one force.

"You had lots of different chief constables. So in a sense they held each other in check."

Georgina Gallivan has never before spoken publicly about her experience.

She worked for 20 years in an IT civilian role, first for Central Scotland Police, based in Stirling, and latterly for Police Scotland.

Ms Gallivan said she had excellent reviews and appraisals every year up to the point where she complained about a male colleague in 2017.

"After that, it all kind of became 'she's a problem, she's got mental health issues, she's just causing trouble'," Ms Gallivan said.

She said she had found it hard to talk about her experience.

Ms Gallivan said one male colleague in particular disliked her.

"I suppose because I was the only female in the office and he told me that I was hormonal," she said.

"He said to my colleagues I was hormonal and 'women were only on this planet for one thing'.

"It was humiliating in front of colleagues that you've worked with for such a long time."

At first Ms Gallivan said managers appeared to take her complaint seriously and began disciplinary proceedings. However, she said she was not officially informed of the outcome and ultimately the man returned to the office.

According to Ms Gallivan, he continued to be offensive and also engaged in harassing behaviour.

She said she took a long period of sick leave after a breakdown and then resigned when it became clear the intention was to silence and block her rather than engage with evidence.

Karen Harper was a police officer in Lanarkshire and Dumfries for 22 years but quit in 2017 due to ill health.

In an employment tribunal she claimed bullying and victimisation but this was not upheld.

She told Newsnight: "Taking on an organisation with a power and resources of a national police force is never going to be anything other than life-changing.

"But it's all for nothing. Because you realise it was a sham. Because what I think now is, I just don't think the truth means anything.

"The truth means nothing in policing now."

Tackling this challenge

In response to the claims of the four women, Deputy Chief Constable Malcolm Graham said: "Policing in Scotland is not immune from the sexism and misogyny which persists across society and we are tackling this challenge head-on.

"The onus is on us to address policy, process and education gaps and challenge bias at every level and wherever it occurs to maintain and build confidence with all communities.

"Earlier this year the chief constable appointed a dedicated chief officer to provide the sustained leadership required to co-ordinate and drive this essential work as we build a service where everyone feels valued and is able to flourish."

Deputy Chief Constable Graham added: "We are realistic about the challenges ahead, however when we sought the views of officers and staff they made it clear progress is being felt in Police Scotland and any assertion otherwise is without foundation.

"Our resolute determination and approach to creating a society where women and girls live free from violence, abuse, exploitation and harassment is outlined in our violence against women and girls strategy, published in March."

In relation to Ms Malone, Police Scotland said it had made a public apology to the former firearms officer and in the days after the employment tribunal judgment, the chief constable commissioned the Police Service of Northern Ireland to carry out an independent review of the decision.

A Police Scotland statement said that during a meeting in April 2022, the chief constable listened to Ms Malone's experiences and personally provided an unreserved apology for the poor response when a dedicated officer raised legitimate concerns.

In relation to Ms Harper's experience, Police Scotland said: "The employment tribunal found Ms Harper's complaint to Police Scotland was dealt with carefully and diligently even though our response did not uphold her complaint.

"While the tribunal ruled against the overwhelming majority of Ms Harper's claims, we recognise that a now-retired officer was found to have shared concerns about Ms Harper in retaliation to her raising a grievance against him.

"We take whistleblowing seriously and have set up an independent advice line to provide confidential, expert advice to any officers and staff who have any concerns."

Commenting on Ms Gallivan's case, Police Scotland said: "A member of police staff raised a number of grievances.

"The matters were appropriately concluded, the individual no longer works for Police Scotland and we have not received an employment claim."

Scottish deposit return scheme delayed until March

Scotland's controversial deposit return scheme will now not launch until March of next year, the country's first minister has announced.

The scheme, which is aimed at increasing the number of single-use drinks bottle and cans that are recycled, was due to start in August.

But it has faced fierce opposition from many small breweries and distillers.

Humza Yousaf announced the delay as he set out his priorities for his government over the next three years.

Mr Yousaf also confirmed that proposals to restrict alcohol advertising will be sent "back to the drawing board" as part of his efforts to "reset" the government's relationship with business.

And a six-month trial will see peak rail fares scrapped across the ScotRail network from October.

His statement was largely overshadowed by the arrest of the SNP's treasurer, Colin Beattie, on Tuesday morning by police officers who are investigating the party's finances.

The deposit return scheme will see 20p added to the price of a single-use drinks container, which will be refunded to people who return the container to retailer or hospitality premises that offer single-use products.

Some retailers will accept returns over the counter while larger stores, shopping centres and community hubs will operate automated receiving points known as reverse vending machines (RVMs).

Many small businesses fear it will place extra costs and other burdens on them at a time when they are already struggling.

And there have been concerns that thousands of firms could end up being forced out of the Scottish market, and that many products will disappear from the shelves.

The scheme will also require Westminster to grant an exemption to the UK-wide Internal Market Act given possible implications elsewhere in the UK.

Mr Yousaf said he remained committed to the deposit return scheme "as a way to increase recycling, reduce litter and help achieve our net zero ambitions".

He added: "We recognise the uncertainty that continues to be created as a result of the UK government delaying the decision to exclude the scheme from the Internal Market Act. We had hoped for that decision this week - but it has not come."

The first minister also said that he and Circular Economy Minister Lorna Slater - the Scottish Green co-leader who has been driving the introduction of the scheme - had heard the concerns of business over its readiness for launch in August.

He said: "As a result, we will now delay the launch of the scheme to the 1st of March 2024. This provides 10 months for businesses to get ready.

"We will use that additional time to work with businesses, and Circularity Scotland, to address concerns with the scheme and ensure a successful launch next year."

A package of measures, Mr Yousaf said, would also be put in place to "simplify and de-risk" the scheme.

Ms Slater will give further details on the new package and timetable for the scheme later this week.

The announcement came just minutes after former SNP minister Fergus Ewing described the scheme as a "Green poll tax".

The Scotch Whisky Association welcomed the delay but stressed that it supported the principles of the deposit return scheme.

But it said the plan in its current form would "hamper the efforts of businesses across the country to reduce waste and bring about a more circular economy".

The Night Time Industries Association said the scheme continued to be "fundamentally flawed and completely unworkable for large parts of our sector" and that a total redesign was needed.

The Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland welcomed the decision but called for the government to engage in "meaning conversation" to address business concerns.

Scottish Secretary Alister Jack also welcomed the pause and said the two governments now had "an opportunity to continue working together on solutions".

Mr Yousaf also acknowledged that proposals to restrict alcohol advertising, including a ban on sponsorships for sport and live events and ending the sale of products with drinks firms' logos on, had caused "real concern" to the industry.

He said: "I have therefore instructed my officials to take these ideas back to the drawing board, and to work with the industry, and with public health stakeholders, to agree a new set of proposals.

"I believe that all of us want to reduce the harm caused by alcohol, particularly to young people - but without undermining Scotland's world-class drinks industry or tourism sector."

The first minister said he hoped that a way forward could be found "which achieves both of those aims".

He also confirmed that the legislation process another of his predecessor Nicola Sturgeon's key but controversial policies - the creation of a new National Care Service - would take "slightly more time" to help build consensus on how it should operate.

And he said Scotland would be rejoining two international education league tables that it left in the wake of the country's schools falling in the rankings.

Mr Yousaf had hoped his speech would allow him to set out what he was billing as a "fresh start for Scotland" after a tumultuous three weeks since he succeeded Ms Sturgeon as first minister and SNP leader.

He pledged his government would be "centred on the principles of equality, opportunity and community" and suggested tax increases could be on the way for higher earners, as he spoke of the need to be "bolder on taxation".

Scottish Conservative MSP Maurice Golden responded to the delay, saying it would come as a "huge relief" to businesses and consumers.

He added: "Ministers urgently need to get back to the drawing board and come up with something that is radically better than what has been proposed so far.

"Their first port of call should be inviting Scottish business leaders to advise how best to move forward."

There was a degree of inevitability that the first minister would announce a delay to the rollout of Scotland's deposit return scheme.

The policy became a political football during the SNP leadership contest with all three candidates promising varying degrees of change.

Businesses have repeatedly raised concerns about how it will be administered with some suggesting smaller firms will be hit hardest.

But the tone of the announcement was interesting.

The delay isn't because of those expressed business concerns - Humza Yousaf said - but because the UK government has failed so far to grant the legislation an exemption from the Internal Markets Act.

This week - we learned - ministers were anticipating a decision on the exemption from UK government counterparts.

The Scottish Greens are not happy and remember they are in government with the SNP in Scotland. In fact it's one of their ministers who is responsible for this policy.

They say that climate action is being "held hostage" by the Tory government at Westminster and lay the blame squarely with them.

Mr Yousaf admitted to journalists earlier on Tuesday that Mr Beattie's arrest was a "very serious matter indeed" and that the timing was "not ideal" in terms of his statement to parliament.

Mr Beattie's arrest came two weeks after former SNP chief executive Peter Murrell - who is married to Nicola Sturgeon - was also arrested before later being released without charge pending further investigation.

Officers spent two days searching Mr Murrell and Ms Sturgeon's home in Glasgow, and also searched the SNP's headquarters in Edinburgh.

Police Scotland launched its Operation Branchform investigation into the SNP's finances in July 2021 after receiving complaints about how more than £660,000 of donations for a second independence referendum campaign were used.

Cardiff riot: Can lack of opportunities for young people be blamed?

People who work and live in Ely say a lack of opportunities for young people was one of the reasons behind the riot.

Residents, charities and councillors have said the closure of a local boxing gym, a general lack of support and investment were contributory factors.

They have all condemned the violence, adding that the community unfairly gets a poor reputation when residents are helpful and supportive of one another.

Investigations continue into the deaths of the two teenagers and the unrest.

Darren Sullivan was a coach at Highfields Amateur Boxing Club in Ely for nearly a decade, until it closed down in October.

He said the boxing club's closure had a huge effect on the community.

"I just think if there was more going on up here or more for the kids to do, stuff like that wouldn't be happening," said Mr Sullivan.

Ely resident Darren joined the boxing club as a child and over the past 10 years, trained young people in the amateur boxing gym five to six times a week.

The gym was one that produced successful boxers and Welsh titles for consecutive years but the gym suddenly closed.

"It's very frustrating. It's not fair on the kids," said the 37-year-old coach.

"I get parents phoning [asking] me have I got any updates? Do I know if we're even going to open again?" he said.

He said parents "want their kids off the streets" and "kept on the straight and narrow", but the loss of the boxing gym has been "massive".

Recalling the fulfilment boxing provided local young people, Darren said: "As soon as I got there they'd be there waiting for me to open up the gates.

"They loved it there, it gives them a focus, it gives them a dream."

Reacting to the riot, Darren said it didn't come as a huge shock.

"I'm not surprised. People are annoyed, people are frustrated," he said.

"We've got nothing up here, they've got nothing left to do, they're left to run around on the streets," he added.

Many of Darren's feelings are echoed by his mum, Lynda Sullivan, chairwoman of local charity, Ely Garden Villagers.

The community group aims to make Ely a "safer and better place to live", by organising sports events, and volunteering in the community "with the aim of keeping young children and youths off the streets and away from crime and drugs".

She's also worked with local football club Avenue Hotspurs FC for 19 years.

She was not surprised by the scenes on Monday night.

"I think people were expecting something to happen along these lines," said the 57-year-old.

She believes the lack of support and limited opportunities has had a big effect on local young people.

"There was no need for what happened at all. A lot of people got a lot of respect for the police," she said.

"Children need something to look forward to, they come home from school now and ask 'where can we go?' There needs to be more positive stuff within our community.

"I feel sorry for the children growing up. If they've got something to look forward to then they respect."

What do figures tell us about the challenges in Ely, Cardiff?

Five neighbourhoods in Ely sit in the top 30 for overall deprivation in Wales, as calculated by Welsh government indicators

About 28% of children were recently estimated to be living in families on relatively low incomes

Ely has more children eligible for free school meals - 59.1% - than any other community in Wales

It has the seventh highest proportion of long term sick or disabled people in Wales

Unemployment has been consistently the highest in the city and among this group, in some neighbourhoods, 39% have never worked and more than half have not in the past 12 months

Councillor Maliika Kaaba, who represents Ely, said the events on Monday were "not reflective of the community" who were hardworking and very tight-knit.

She said that Ely is a "long-standing", "solid" community where some families have lived for generations since the houses were built in the 1930s and 1940s.

"It's very much a community of people who help other people and help one another," she said.

The Labour councillor said she went to the street on Tuesday night and spoke to residents who were shocked and saddened by what happened.

She said that the majority of people who lived there were elderly and not involved in the unrest - and were "angry and upset".

"Ely people are proud people", she said, "it gets an unfair reputation", adding that many people in the community support each other.

"If you needed help you could knock on any door and someone would come and help you," she said.

"The perception of Ely is dead wrong," she added, emphasising "what happened is not reflective of the community, they are very hardworking people".

"It is deprived it needs services, no one would deny it needs services," she said, adding there had been investment, and the community had a very good youth centre, and the youth workers were well-known in the community.

"It is really sad for the community. It is tragic for the families."

Ms Kaaba said the community's focus was now on supporting the families.

Russell Goodway is one of three councillors for the Ely ward and was leader of South Glamorgan and Cardiff Council from 1993 until 2004.

He saw "massive funding" into areas like housing and doctors surgeries in Ely following the 1991 riot.

He said despite the investment and support it "hadn't been transformational in terms of people's individual wealth", but said "it's not being poor that triggers violence" and condemned the "mindless" behaviour of rioters.

Police had "reassured" Russell "that no chase had occurred", and he felt "saddened" and "annoyed" that people had "exploited the tragedy to vent their frustrations".

He said most people in the area were "absolutely appalled", as there was usually a "great sense of community" in Ely, and added that he believed many of the rioters weren't even from the area.

"The tragedy was a trigger and when false rumours are put on social media, which has no substance whatsoever, it then proves to be magnet for people across south Wales to get involved," he said.

He added that people should have "thought of the families of the young boys, and the pain and tragedy they must be feeling".

Sociologist Dr Simon Williams, from Swansea University, said psychology and sociology showed that deprivation, distrust and disillusionment in the area could have contributed towards the riot.

He has studied the societal similarities between places and communities where riots have broken out.

"It's important not to condone and justify violence, which of course is never excusable," said the lecturer.

"But I think what we can do is we can look at some of the conditions to help explain why this might have happened.

"More often than not we see riots or community violence occurring in deprived communities, as we saw recently in Mayhill [Swansea].

"Ely is one of the most deprived communities, not just in Cardiff, but in Wales.

"We see for example, that Ely has approximately twice as high unemployment compared to the Welsh average. We also see a much higher proportion of young people who are living in relative poverty," he added.

The sociologist said this creates "a sense of inequality" and a feeling of being let down by authorities, the state and by government.

He added that a "gradual decline in confidence and trust in police in the UK and Wales" has happened in the last few years.

Dr Williams studied behaviours and public attitudes during the pandemic and said "young adults in particular are actually quite disillusioned about the future", worsened by Covid-19 and the cost of living crisis.

He believes the more that can be done to reduce these inequalities to understand and to try to help offset and improve matters, the "more likely we are to avoid these kind of things happening in future".

Henry Kissinger turns 100 this week. He should be ashamed to be seen in public

Much of the world views Kissinger as a war criminal – yet in the US, surrounded by powerful friends, he is feted as a celebrity intellectual

Henry Kissinger turns 100 on Saturday, but his legacy has never been in worse shape. Though many commentators now speak of a “tortured and deadly legacy”, for decades Kissinger was lauded by all quarters of the political and media establishment.

A teenage Jewish refugee who fled Nazi Germany, Kissinger charted an unlikely path to some of the most powerful positions on Earth. Even more strangely, as national security adviser and secretary of state under Nixon and Ford, he became something of a pop icon.

Back then, one fawning profile of the young statesman cast him as “the sex symbol of the Nixon administration”. In 1969, according to the profile, Kissinger attended a party full of Washington socialites with an envelope marked “Top Secret” tucked under his arm. The other party guests could hardly contain their curiosity, so Kissinger deflected their questions with a quip: the envelope contained his copy of the latest Playboy magazine. (Hugh Hefner apparently found this hilarious and thereafter ensured that the national security adviser got a free subscription.)

What the envelope really contained was a draft copy of Nixon’s “silent majority” speech, a now-infamous address that aimed to draw a sharp line between the moral decadence of antiwar liberals and Nixon’s unflinching realpolitik.

The actual top-secret work he was doing in the 1970s aged just as poorly. Within a few short years he masterminded illegal bombings in Laos and Cambodia and enabled genocide in East Timor and East Pakistan. Meanwhile, Kissinger was known among Beltway socialites as “the playboy of the western wing”. He liked to be photographed, and photographers obliged. He was a fixture on gossip pages, particularly when his dalliances with famous women spilled into public view – like when he and the actor Jill St John inadvertently set off the alarm at her Hollywood mansion late one night as they stole away to her pool. (“I was teaching her chess,” Kissinger explained later.)

While Kissinger gallivanted with Washington’s jet set, he and Nixon – a pair so firmly joined at the hip that Isaiah Berlin christened them “Nixonger” – were busy contriving a political brand rooted in their supposed disdain for the liberal elite, whose effete morality, they claimed, could lead only to paralysis.

Kissinger certainly disdained the antiwar movement, disparaging demonstrators as “upper-middle-class college kids” and warning: “The very people who shout ‘Power to the People’ are not going to be the people who take over this country if it turns into a test of strength.” He also scorned women: “To me women are no more than a pastime, a hobby. Nobody devotes too much time to a hobby.” But it’s indisputable that Kissinger held a fondness for the gilded liberalism of high society, the exclusive parties and steak dinners and flashbulbs.

High society loved him back. Gloria Steinem, an occasional dining companion, called Kissinger “the only interesting man in the Nixon administration”. The gossip columnist Joyce Haber described him as “worldly, humorous, sophisticated, and a cavalier with women.” The Hef considered him a friend, and once claimed in print that a poll of his models revealed Kissinger to be the man most widely desired for dates at the Playboy mansion.

This infatuation didn’t end with the 1970s. When Kissinger turned 90 in 2013, his red-carpet birthday celebration was attended by a bipartisan crowd that included Michael Bloomberg, Roger Ailes, Barbara Walters, even “veteran for peace” John Kerry, along with some 300 other A-listers.

An article in Women’s Wear Daily reported that Bill Clinton and John McCain delivered the birthday toasts in a ballroom done up in chinoiserie, to please the night’s guest of honor. (McCain, who spent more than five years as a POW, described his “wonderful affection” for Kissinger, “because of the Vietnam war, which was something that was enormously impactful to both of our lives”.) The birthday boy himself then took the stage, where he reminded guests about the “rhythm of history” and seized the occasion to preach the gospel of his favorite cause: bipartisanship.

Kissinger’s capacity for bipartisanship was renowned. (Republicans Condoleezza Rice and Donald Rumsfeld were in attendance early in the evening, and later in the night Democrat Hillary Clinton strode in through a freight entrance with open arms, asking: “Ready for round two?”) During the party, McCain gushed that Kissinger “has been a consultant and adviser to every president, Republican and Democrat, since Nixon”. McCain probably spoke for everyone in the ballroom when he added: “I know of no individual who is more respected in the world than Henry Kissinger.”

In fact, much of the world reviles Kissinger. The former secretary of state even avoids visiting several countries out of fear that he might be apprehended and charged with war crimes. In 2002, for example, a Chilean court demanded he answer questions about his role in that country’s 1973 coup d’état. In 2001, a French judge sent police officers to Kissinger’s Paris hotel room to serve him a formal request for questioning about the same coup, during which several French citizens were disappeared.

Around the same time, he cancelled a trip to Brazil after rumors began circling that he would be detained and compelled to answer questions about his role in Operation Condor, the 1970s scheme that united South American dictatorships in disappearing one another’s exiled opponents. An Argentinian judge had already named Kissinger as one potential “defendant or suspect” in a future criminal indictment.

But in the United States, Kissinger is untouchable. There, one of the 20th century’s most prolific butchers is beloved by the rich and powerful, regardless of their partisan affiliation. Kissinger’s bipartisan appeal is straightforward: he was a top strategist of America’s empire of capital at a critical moment in that empire’s development.

Small wonder that the political establishment has regarded Kissinger as an asset and not an aberration. He embodied what the two ruling parties share: the resolve to ensure favorable conditions for American investors in as much of the world as possible. A stranger to shame and inhibition, Kissinger was able to guide the American empire through a treacherous period in world history, when the United States’ rise to global domination sometimes seemed on the brink of collapse.

The Kissinger doctrine persists today: if sovereign countries refuse to be worked into broader US schemes, the American national security state will move swiftly to undercut their sovereignty. This is business as usual for the US, no matter which party sits in the White House – and Kissinger, while he lives, remains among the chief stewards of this status quo.

The historian Gerald Horne once recounted a story about the time Kissinger nearly drowned while canoeing beneath one of the world’s largest waterfalls. Tossed in those churning waters, the statesman was finally forced to confront the terror of losing control, of facing a crisis in which even his own incredible influence could not insulate him from personal disaster. But the panic was only temporary – his guide righted the boat, and Kissinger again escaped unscathed.

Perhaps time will soon accomplish what the Victoria Falls failed to do so many decades ago.

‘It’s not just in football’: young players’ families on racism in Spain

Abuse hurled at Real Madrid’s Vinícius Júnior caused a storm – but what of the everyday reality of life for people of colour?

A little after 5pm on Tuesday, a young boy in a Real Madrid strip trotted on to a damp neighbourhood football pitch in the centre of the Spanish capital, oblivious to both the racism flung at the man whose name he wore on his back, and to the national and international debate it had generated. “We haven’t told him about the Vinícius thing yet,” said Mohamed’s mother, Milene Dos Santos, as she and her husband looked on from the sidelines. “If he asks, then we’ll tell him. He’s only seven, but he’ll need to be prepared for what’s to come.”

It appears the events of the past few days have been too much for many, far older, Spaniards to take in, too. The abuse hurled at Real Madrid’s Brazilian winger, Vinícius Júnior during a match against Valencia on Sunday has already resulted in three swift arrests. Four other people, meanwhile, have been arrested in connection with the dummy, dressed in the player’s shirt, that was hung from a bridge in the Spanish capital.

The 22-year-old footballer, who was reduced to tears by the latest racist aggressions, said his treatment was proof of just how thoroughly racism permeates both La Liga and Spanish society.

“I’m sorry for those Spaniards who disagree but today, in Brazil, Spain is known as a country of racists,” he said after the match.

His words were echoed by Brazil’s president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who called on Fifa and La Liga to take “serious measures”, adding: “We cannot allow fascism and racism to seize control of football stadiums.”

Those charges have forced Spain’s political leaders to position themselves on the issue of racism as the country goes to the polls for regional and municipal elections on Sunday. The Socialist prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, said that “hatred and xenophobia should have no place in football nor in our society”. A government spokesperson went further, insisting perpetrators of racism behaviour “are prosecuted and punished” in Spain.

Alberto Núñez Feijóo, the leader of the conservative People’s party, said racism and sport were “totally incompatible”, but added: “Spain is not a racist country in any way.”

The campaign trail platitudes and denials felt rather remote to some of those gathered around the pitch where Mohamed and his teammates were training in Lavapiés, the diverse Madrid neighbourhood where African and Bangladeshi shops and restaurants rub up against hipster coffee shops. Their neighbourhood club, Dragones de Lavapiés, fields 20 teams made up of about 400 players from more than 50 countries.

Dos Santos, who was born in Portugal to parents from Cape Verde but has lived in Spain for 30 of her 32 years, said she had grown up with all manner of microaggressions, from people touching her hair to repeated questions as to why she spoke such good Spanish.

“It’s a burden I’ve carried since I was a kid,” she said. “I grew up here but I’ve never felt like I was from here.”

She and her husband, Ibrahim Ndao, who was born in Senegal, felt bad about the abuse Vinícius had suffered, but were not surprised by it.

“There’s systemic racism in Spain and I hope what’s happened opens people’s eyes to it,” she said. “Maybe people with privilege will take notice. Maybe it’s easier not to acknowledge the reality or maybe lots of people just aren’t conscious of it. There are very few politicians of colour; you look at all the TV election debates and there’s no one of colour.” Spain, she added, “still has a long way to go”.

Mame Gueye, who had brought her eight-year-old son, Serigne, to Dragones training said she had felt awful when she saw what Vinícius had been forced to endure.

“He was so depressed and powerless about what was happening,” she said. “I think he was scared and nervous and has suffered a lot and no one has done anything. He’s complained and nothing’s been done.”

However, Gueye, who moved to Spain from Senegal 15 years ago, disagreed with some of the player’s comments. “Racism exists here but I don’t agree Spain is a racist country,” she said.

The Dragones de Lavapiés, which was founded nine years ago, exists to defend and promote diversity and to fight racism and stereotypes. The club’s president, Dolores Galindo, said that while its players and their families experienced racism on a daily basis, that racism still goes unseen by much of Spanish society.

“If you’re a white person and you’ve never experienced it personally, you don’t believe in racism,” said Galindo, who is white. “Until you spend a lot of time with kids of colour – especially African kids – you don’t realise just how often things happen to them, one after another. And it’s not just someone saying something on the pitch.”

She pointed to a recent trip when some of the younger dragons were taken to a museum. Although all the children stood on the museum’s lawn, the only one called out – twice – by a security guard was a boy of African heritage.

“People are talking now about whether or not Spain is racist,” said Galindo. “I’m Spanish and I love my country and I don’t want that to exist here. But you can’t try to isolate it and say, ‘No, this only exists in football’.”

According to a survey published last year, 25% of Spaniards aged 15-29 (the majority of them male) hold clearly racist or xenophobic views, with most of their racial hatred directed at Gypsies and people from sub-Saharan Africa and Morocco. Figures from Spain’s interior ministry show that Spanish police investigated 639 racist or xenophobic incidents in 2021 – a 24% rise on 2019.

Neither the statistics nor the probably fleeting media and political debate over racism come as any surprise to Okba Mohammad, a 24-year-old Syrian journalist who has lived in Spain since fleeing his home town of Deraa during the Bashar al-Assad regime’s Russian-backed offensive there five years ago.

“Spain is obviously a racist country,” he said. “There’s institutional racism but there’s also racism because of the lack of anti-racist education. There are a lot of people who are racist without knowing it, or people who are racist because they want to be racist.”

For all the outcry over Vinícius, he added, the abuse could have been directed at any black or non-white player.

“My problem is with the reaction, because there are a lot of people who are suffering racism every day and who haven’t been afforded this kind of institutional, social or media reaction,” said Mohammad.

He also contrasted the speed of the arrests in the Vinícius case with his own ill-fated attempts to report racist behaviour he has suffered. While the media were guilty of double-standards by focusing on the plight of one footballer and ignoring the daily lived experiences of so many other victims of racism in Spain, he added, its hypocrisy was nothing new – and was indicative of a wider, and far more deeply ingrained prejudice.

“We saw the huge scale of the institutional racism with the war in Ukraine when the Ukrainian refugees came to Spain and to other European countries,” he said. “They brought in a law to give the Ukrainians their papers within 24 hours. When that happened, I’d been waiting two and a half years in Spain for my papers to come through.”

For all the column inches, the soundbites and the pledges, Mohammad thinks Sunday’s poisonous events in the Valencia’s Mestalla stadium – and the deeper wells of toxicity from which they sprang – will soon fade from public discourse.

“I think this will be forgotten,” he said. “But the people who won’t forget it are the people of colour who suffer racism and report it every day.”

With Covid cases surging across Australia, will a fourth vaccine dose be required?

How effective would a second booster be? Who is eligible now? Why are third dose numbers lagging? Experts explain

Health experts are weighing up whether a second booster rollout will soon be needed as Covid-19 cases again surge across Australia and winter approaches. A number of nations, including the UK, are rapidly expanding eligibility for a fourth dose, but some experts have questioned its effectiveness.

How likely is it a fourth dose will be required?

The government has yet to commit to a second booster rollout. However, it is expected older Australians will be the first to be eligible when it does begin.

Earlier in March the federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said advice from Australia’s vaccine advisory group was due by the end of the month on whether a fourth dose would be recommended for people aged 65 and over.

Hunt said it was more likely than not a fourth dose would be needed for some groups of the population ahead of winter, when a spike in both Covid and flu infections is forecast.

“I can’t pre-empt the decision but … they are potentially going to recommend a second booster, which would be potentially the start of an annual program for people 65 and above,” Hunt said.

“We’re expecting that advice from Atagi within the next three weeks, if not earlier.”

Who is already eligible for a fourth dose?

A limited number of people are eligible already. A fourth vaccination dose is recommended for severely immunocompromised people aged over 16, who produce a lower immune response than the equivalent number of doses in healthy people.

Earlier this year, adults with weakened immune systems, including cancer patients, became eligible to receive a fourth vaccination after Atagi guidelines changed due to the Omicron outbreak.

Last month, the booster program was further expanded to severely immunocompromised adolescents aged 16 and 17.

A fourth dose can be administered three months after the completion of an immunocompromised person’s primary course – currently three doses.

Cancer Australia CEO, professor Dorothy Keefe, said immunocompromised people could have a prolonged Covid infection which increased the risk of viral variants developing.

“As people who are severely immunocompromised may have a suboptimal response or non-response to the standard two-dose primary vaccine schedule, Atagi recommends … a fourth dose … to increase their protection,” she said.

What countries are administering fourth doses?

Until recently, a number of countries including the US, Chile, Denmark, Germany, Sweden and the UK were similarly limiting second boosters to the immunocompromised.

But this week, England expands its eligibility to about five million people including care home residents, people over 75 and immunocompromised people aged over 12. It follows a resurgence of Covid cases across the UK, with infections in the over-70s at a record high.

Similarly in Asia, South Korea is recommending a fourth dose for nursing home and care residents and workers as well as the immunocompromised in light of rising infections among elderly people.

Israel was the first country to administer a fourth dose more widely. It began to roll out third doses in July, and since January, anyone who is a health worker, immunocompromised, or over 60 has been eligible for a fourth vaccine. Israeli health experts have since suggested a fourth dose for all adults.

Last week, Pfizer and BioNTech requested emergency authorisation from the US Food and Drug Administration for a fourth dose among the over 65s, citing Israeli datasets which showed an additional mRNA booster lowered infections and severe illness.

How effective would a fourth dose be in Australia?

There’s mixed evidence on the effectiveness of a second booster, however the risk calculation is evolving as new Covid variants emerge.

Deakin University chair of epidemiology, Prof Catherine Bennett, said it was still too early to tell what cover the third dose provided and whether vaccinating with a fourth dose would change health outcomes.

But she said Australia had the benefit of being one season behind and being able to monitor what was occurring in the rest of the world.

“What we don’t yet know is if Covid will ever become a winter bug,” she said. “Omicron reached us in the peak of summer, if we reach a period where we don’t see new variants and none end up being infectious enough to replace what we have, it might slope back into something more seasonal.”

The Omicron sub-variant BA.2 is on the rise in Australia, and is expected to become the dominant strain of Covid-19 in the coming months. It is highly likely BA.2, which shares similar mutations to Omicron, will be similarly resistant to a third dose.

Nevertheless, Australian regulators require strong data before approving additional doses. After its latest meeting on 11 March, Atagi said it was “continuing to monitor and discuss” emerging evidence on subsequent booster doses “particularly coming into the winter months”.

An Israeli trial released in February suggested receiving a fourth vaccine raised antibody levels, but provided little extra protection against Covid-19 in addition to a third dose.

New research published in the New England Journal of Medicine this month, though, shows immunity from a third jab wanes quickly – dropping to about 45% with the Omicron strain ten weeks after a third Pfizer dose despite its initial protection from severe illness.

Bennett said no matter what Atagi decided, immunity was likely to be different for younger versus older and immunocompromised adults. “We don’t treat everyone as one, if it’s good enough from the booster there’s no point in giving another dose … and there’s a risk it might desensitise you to the virus,” she said.

Why are third doses still lagging?

The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) president, Dr Karen Price, said it was a “matter for the government” as to whether a fourth dose should be rolled out to the general population. But there were “several reasons” why booster rates remained sluggish.

As of 13 March, only 65.6% of eligible people had received a third vaccine dose, while in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, just 49.4% had the jab.

“Some patients are uncertain about when to get their booster dose after contracting the virus and others are potentially complacent because of widespread media reports about the Omicron variant being less severe,” Price said.

“It’s not just about protecting yourself, it’s also about protecting the broader community including people more vulnerable to severe effects from the virus.”

What about the flu jab?

The seasonal flu all but disappeared in 2020 and 2021 due to public health measures, however Atagi expects a resurgence of the virus outside the usual influenza season as international borders reopen and with Covid restrictions eased.

There wasn’t a single influenza death in 2021, while case numbers were at 3% of those recorded in 2020 – which was already eight times lower than the five-year average of 163,015 cases.

Atagi said lower vaccine coverage in 2021 and virus circulation meant many children under five hadn’t been exposed to the virus or developed immunity, thereby increasing the risk of complications.

Atagi has recommended those planning an international trip receive the influenza vaccine before they fly, and get vaccinated as soon as this year’s jab becomes available.

Bennett said this year the population didn’t have the “natural boost” that came from having relatively high levels of the flu.

“But the flu hasn’t taken off overseas in ways we might have thought it would – there’s some hope it won’t be devastating but we need to be careful,” she said.

As Covid and the flu are different viruses – it’s possible to have both at the same time, ominously dubbed “flurona”.

Bennett said while this was a concern – it wouldn’t necessarily become common.

“The viruses may be competing with each other,” she said. “But we should be very careful about both because … the world’s shifted which makes it more challenging to predict.”

‘My time in the UK has been a disaster’: Hongkongers fear deportation after years left in limbo

Britain vowed to protect citizens of its former colony, but the Guardian has spoken to people stuck in temporary accommodation not knowing if they will be granted asylum

In March 2021, less than one month after his 18th birthday, Lawson* made a decision that would change the course of his life for ever.

The previous year had been tumultuous in Hong Kong. Lawson, like millions of other Hongkongers, had taken to the streets to participate in pro-democracy protests against the influence of the Chinese Communist party, which was seeking to tighten its grip on the territory.

He had been forced by police to kneel on the ground as he choked on teargas at the siege of Hong Kong Polytechnic University in November 2019, where he said he was also arrested for rioting before being released without charge.

Beijing declared victory over Lawson and the protesters with the imposition of a draconian national security law in June 2020. When that law was passed, the government promised that it would not be applied retroactively. But by January 2021, the police had arrested dozens of pro-democracy activists, protesters, teachers and scholars, who became known as the Hong Kong 47 and were preparing to charge them with conspiracy to commit subversion, an offence that carries a maximum of a life sentence.

Lawson saw the writing on the wall, and a friend bought him a plane ticket to London. But his trauma continues. He is now one of the growing number of Hongkongers left in limbo in the UK, fearing deportation back to the persecution from which they escaped, after claiming asylum in a system where the average wait for a decision is more than a year.

As of December 2022, there were 160 Hongkongers in the UK awaiting decisions on their asylum applications, more than double the number in December 2020. And 13 Hongkongers were either deported or left the UK voluntarily after being rejected for asylum in 2020 and 2021.

In early 2021, as the Hong Kong authorities were closing in on anyone who dared criticise them, their counterparts in the UK were preparing to offer those critics a way out. Dominic Raab, then the UK’s foreign secretary, said the national security law breached international law, and that the UK was opening its doors to those who wanted to flee. “We have been clear we won’t look the other way when it comes to Hong Kong. We will live up to our historic responsibility to its people,” he said.

The UK offer was this: anyone with British national (overseas) (BNO) status, and their dependents, could come to live, study and work in the UK. Within a year of the scheme being launched, there were more than 100,000 applications. By December 2022, 105,200 had arrived, one of the biggest waves of non-EU migration to the UK in postwar history.

Lawson, along with more than 100 other Hongkongers now fearing deportation from the UK, was not among that historic cohort. The BNO immigration route was open to anyone born before 1 July 1997, when Hong Kong was handed over from British to Chinese rule, who had registered for BNO status, along with their partner or spouse and eligible dependents. That excluded many young people such as Lawson, who were often at the frontlines of the protests, unless they came with a BNO parent (the scheme was expanded in November 2022).

Lawson’s parents had not applied for BNO status, so he joined a smaller and more vulnerable group – he became an asylum seeker. “I just wanted to stay [in the UK] and escape the persecution from the Hong Kong and China government,” he says. But two years later, living in asylum-seekers’ hotel accommodation, he says that his time in the UK has been “a disaster” as he continues to be left in limbo, not knowing whether he will be deported or granted asylum.

Although many exiled Hongkongers see themselves as political refugees, very few choose to claim asylum. It is a last resort behind the BNO route, or getting a job or student visa. Between 2020 and 2022, there were 184,916 asylum applications to the UK, of which only 259 came from Hongkongers.

Those who choose to come to the UK asking for asylum usually do so because they have no alternative, or no idea what they are getting themselves into.

When Ivan Yim arrived in London in November 2020, aged 18, he didn’t know where he would sleep that night. Unable to answer basic questions about his travel plans, he was denied entry to the UK. But he couldn’t face returning to Hong Kong, where he feared being arrested and tortured, as he says he was in 2019. So he claimed asylum. After waiting for 15 hours in an airport detention centre, he was picked up by Hongkongers who had been notified of his presence through a network of contacts.

Although the BNO scheme is “unusual in how liberal it is”, it can still be “prohibitively expensive” for some, says Peter Walsh, a senior researcher at the Migration Observatory, based at the University of Oxford. A single applicant must have at least £5,370 to cover the application fee, the NHS healthcare surcharge and the minimum savings threshold.

Since Hongkongers started arriving in such large numbers in 2020, community groups have sprung into action to help people resettle in the UK. Many asylum seekers (and BNOs with no immediate accommodation options) end up in “safe houses” provided by fellow Hongkongers, or are housed with volunteer host families. These arrangements can be a more welcoming alternative to government-sponsored asylum accommodation. But the relationship between the asylum seekers and the hosts can also be tense, and ripe for exploitation.

Several asylum seekers interviewed by the Guardian say they were forced to cook and clean at community centres or safe houses in return for free accommodation. But more troubling for many is what one describes as the “emotional blackmail” of certain hosts, who shout at or even physically abuse their charges.

Although Ivan felt unsafe, it was hard for him to leave the safe house, as he says his movements were monitored closely, and he was warned that he might be kidnapped by agents of the Chinese government if he struck out alone. But in early 2021 he fled, and on 1 February moved into government-sponsored accommodation for asylum seekers in a hotel in east London, where he spent the next 26 months. He moved out in April, after being granted asylum in December.

Lawson continues to wait in a hotel for asylum seekers for his fate to be decided. He moved there in September 2021, after bouncing between various safe houses in England and Wales, where he describes being exploited and in one case physically assaulted after an argument with his hosts, who warned him that he would end up in a refugee camp if he disobeyed them.

Instead, he ended up in hospital, before seeking refuge in his current accommodation. The hotel is “comfortable”, he says, apart from the fact that hotel staff have entered his room without warning on several occasions, which “triggers my mental illness”. For asylum seekers who are fearful of the overseas reach of the Chinese Communist party, these kinds of intrusions can be particularly traumatic. For Ivan it provoked a breakdown.

Since the start of the BNO scheme, the refusal rate for applicants has started to creep up, from 0.5% in the first quarter of 2021 to 3% by the end of 2022. It is too soon to say whether those rejections will become asylum applications. But if they do, those new asylum seekers can expect to wait more than six months for a decision, with a refusal rate for Hongkongers of about 15%.

Asylum seekers from Hong Kong can find it hard to provide evidence that they fear political persecution, such as pictures of them at protests, because they have often deliberately left no trace of themselves online, says Lucas Yue, an outreach officer at Project Haven, run by Hongkongers in Britain to help non-BNO Hongkongers. The BNO scheme is a “more stable, predictable and faster way to escape” from Hong Kong, he says.

Nathan Law, an exiled activist who was granted asylum in the UK in 2021, said that the experience of BNOs and asylum seekers was “drastically different” and that the “maltreatment of these asylum seekers should be exposed and tackled”.

A Home Office spokesperson said: “The unprecedented Hong Kong BN(O) visa route reflects the UK’s historic and moral commitment to those people of Hong Kong who chose to retain their ties to the UK by taking up British national (overseas) status at the point of Hong Kong’s handover to China in 1997.

“The route is a British success story with more than 153,700 visas granted by the end of December 2022. In November 2022, we expanded the route to allow young Hongkongers born since 1 July 1997 and with at least one parent with British national (overseas) status to apply independently of their parents.”

Tens of thousands of Hongkongers have found a haven in the UK thanks to the BNO scheme. But for refugees like Lawson and Ivan, it is a different story. “I came here to seek safety,” says Ivan. “But, not only for Hong Kong people, the entire system [for refugees] is far too unsafe.”

World Cup security guards still jailed in Qatar after dispute over unpaid wages

Workers at World Cup 2022 venues fired as tournament ended and allegedly jailed or deported after trying to claim unpaid wages

Three World Cup security guards who were detained while trying to resolve a dispute over unpaid wages are still being held in Qatar four months after their arrest.

Shakir Ullah and Zafar Iqbal from Pakistan, and an Indian national, have allegedly been sentenced to six months in prison and fined 10,000 riyals (£2,220) each.

The findings, first established by the human rights group Equidem and verified by the Guardian, are a shocking postscript to the World Cup, which Fifa promised would leave a lasting legacy of better workers’ rights in the Gulf state. Qatar has not commented on the case.

The three men were among hundreds of security guards, employed by Stark Security Services, a local private security company, who were deployed at key sites throughout the World Cup but were laid off in the days after the final, with months still left on their contracts.

Ullah, who was affectionately known as chacha (uncle in Urdu) by his colleagues, was described by one as a “calm, quiet person, but when it comes to his rights, he will not allow you to cheat him”.

Calling for the immediate release of the three men, Equidem’s director, Mustafa Qadri, said the men had been punished for simply demanding what they and hundreds of their colleagues were owed after their contracts were terminated early.

“This is the true cost of Fifa’s reckless disregard for the rights of people who help them generate huge profits,” Qadri said.

Hundreds of other former Stark Security workers are also coming to terms with their own traumatic ordeal after disputing the early termination of their contracts.

While Lionel Messi lifted the World Cup trophy in Qatar after what Fifa’s president, Gianni Infantino, called the “best ever” World Cup, Jacob* and Patrick*, from Kenya, were told they were being fired.

They had spent much of the tournament working as security guards at Stadium 974, which hosted matches involving Argentina, Brazil, France and Portugal and stars such as Messi, Mbappé and Ronaldo.

They say the message came as a shock, because their contracts still had three months left to run. They were then instructed to collect their final salary for the days they had worked in December and leave their accommodation.

Just days after the final they suddenly found themselves jobless and homeless. “When they needed you, they treated you well, but now they are done with you, you are nothing to them,” said Jacob.

Worse was to come: after attempting to dispute the early termination of their contracts, the two men were allegedly detained and deported along with hundreds of others.

“They say it was the most beautiful World Cup, but at the end of the day we just lost everything,” said Patrick.

In the months leading up to the World Cup, Stark Security took on hundreds of security guards to be deployed at key tournament sites. “Because it was Fifa, we all said ‘let’s join’,” said another worker from Ghana.

The Guardian interviewed nine security guards who worked for the company, including Jacob and Patrick, all of whom had their employment terminated early. Four were allegedly later deported and five others were fired at the same time or shortly afterwards but were not deported.

The workers’ contracts, seen by the Guardian, promised a monthly salary of 2,700 riyals (£600) for working seven days a week, as well as providing them with food and accommodation.

The nine workers interviewed by the Guardian all believed they had been employed for six months. Their contracts stated: “Notice period: six months post date of joining.” Under reforms made to Qatar’s labour laws in 2020, employers and workers can end contracts early, but they must give one month’s notice.

“We went to Qatar to earn money and make a better life for our family, but the company and authorities cheated us,” said another fired security guard from Pakistan. “We felt so helpless.”

With nowhere else to stay, no way to repay the huge debts they had taken on to get to Qatar and few other jobs available once the World Cup had finished, Jacob, Patrick and hundreds of other security guards attempted to negotiate with Stark Security and filed a complaint with the Qatari government.

“We told them: we’re still willing to work,” said Jacob. “We have not failed you in any way, we have not committed any crime; if you wish to stop [employing] us, you have to compensate us for these three remaining months.”

But Stark Security told them that there was no more work as the tournament was over, and, according to the workers, ordered the labour camp to stop serving food to them. “They kept coming to the accommodation and threatening us, banging on our door so we would leave,” said Jacob.

On 23 January, about 200 of the guards hired buses to take them to the headquarters of a company associated with Stark Security to negotiate for their unpaid wages. Staff allegedly called the police and claimed the workers were blocking the road. The guards said, apart from their leaders, they did not even get off the buses.

The workers were allegedly taken to a detention centre by the police, with more than 200 later deported, including the four men interviewed by the Guardian, who had been on the buses.

Eventually, with no other options, the men interviewed by the Guardian accepted their wages for the days they had worked in December. Any hope they might be paid for the remaining months of their contract was lost. They said that they, along with all the other men detained with them, were deported within a week. Only Shakir Ullah and his two colleagues remained.

Equidem said it had interviewed 43 men who had worked for Stark Security and allegedly had their contracts terminated early and been deported.

For those who say they were forced to return home, the sense of outrage and shock is still raw. Some blame the Qatari regime. “Nothing happens without its knowledge. We should have gotten our rights if the Qatar government had cared,” said Jacob.

But that anger is also directed at Fifa, which made $7.5bn (£6bn) over the four years leading up to the Qatar World Cup. “Fifa made big money from the World Cup and we deserve our share,” said a guard from Ghana.

A spokesperson for Qatar government’s international media office said an investigation found that Stark Security had failed to comply with all of Qatar’s labour laws and would be penalised.

It confirmed the workers had been employed on temporary six-month contracts, but “a resolution was swiftly reached between the company and its employees, whereby the workers were remunerated in full for their services and their contracts were concluded in accordance with their specified terms”.

It did not confirm if any of the workers had been deported, but said: “Qatar does not arrest or deport workers for seeking to resolve their employment disputes. The rights of all individuals working in Qatar are upheld and protected through the fair and just application of legal due process.”

Fifa directed the Guardian to an earlier statement it made on the case, in which it said it “seeks to facilitate discussions at host country level, to explore available options for remedy”.

Stark Security Services did not respond to requests for comment. Qatar’s local World Cup organising committee declined to comment.

‘From bad to worse’: drought puts Kenya’s hospitals under pressure

New mothers at a rural hospital running out of water and power tell of their struggles as health workers leave for safer areas

The morning rounds at Modogashe hospital in Lagdera do not take long. Most of the rooms opening on to its narrow hallway are empty. “We don’t get that many patients these days,” says Saveria Njoki, the head of nursing. Only three patients were on the ward that day, and none would be staying very long.

According to a local official, patient numbers in Lagdera – a district in Garissa County, in the east of Kenya – have dropped from nearly 12,000 in 2019 to just over 8,000 last year, as people move away in search of water.

Kenya, Ethiopia and Somalia are experiencing their worst drought in 40 years, with their sixth consecutive failed rainy season. The number of people in Kenya facing severe hunger is expected to rise to 5.4 million this year, particularly in the north of the country, where about 95% of surface water sources have dried up. Garissa County is among the worst-hit regions and hordes of people have moved from the countryside to Garissa town, which sits on the Tana River.

Water has always been a problem at Modogashe hospital, which is located along a dusty, windy road. But the situation has got much worse over the past three years as the nearby rivers that provided it with some water have dried up. It is now reliant on water being delivered by road – which can be infrequent because there are not enough trucks.

Lack of water and electricity has already forced the hospital to close its operating theatre and neonatal unit.

Usuba Hussein, 20, brought her baby to the hospital because she was malnourished. Hussein fetches a 20-litre barrel of water from the hospital storage tank and uses her feet to shuffle it back to the ward. “This water needs to last me and my baby for four days,” she says. That includes drinking and washing.

“Things have gone from bad to worse,” says Njoki. “I stay because it’s very difficult to move elsewhere when you’re employed by the government, so I can only wait for retirement.”

In the maternity ward, Athar Khalif, 22, lies on a bed recovering. She gave birth to her daughter on her way here. She wanted to be at the hospital because she bled heavily last time she had a baby and needed to be near trained medics. But she had to wait for a water truck to arrive at home. Women giving birth at Modogashe hospital usually bring a jerrycan of water with them, because the facility will probably not have enough.

In times of extreme water shortages, like now, health workers ask mothers help out. “I was rushing with my children to get water, then I felt some sharp pains. I knew I wouldn’t get to the hospital in time,” says Khalif.

With no water, Njoki has sometimes had to use saline solutions from IV drips to stop infections during deliveries and manage postpartum haemorrhage, the leading cause of maternal deaths. Garissa County has the highest maternal mortality rate in the country: 641 deaths for every 100,000 live births, according to 2019 data by Kenya’s National Bureau of Statistics.

“Put yourself in that situation,” says Njoki. “There’s no water, the mother is bleeding, and you are there and have to do something. Sometimes you have two deliveries without water and a third one on the way. Your only aim is to see the mother and the child alive.”

Mohamed Abdullahi, the chief of Unicef’s Garissa office, says many hospitals in the area are operating under conditions that place patients at risk. “They may be admitted with one issue but pick up an infection while being treated,” he says.

Modogashe has had to cancel some of its critical outreach work because nearly half the community health volunteers who run the programme have left because of drought, leaving the service overstretched.

“Things are really bad,” says Mohammed Sede Dif, 60, a community health worker. “Many [volunteers] have moved to other places. When it rains, they’ll come back, but for now, there’s a big problem. There are so many households that need us and just a few of us left. We receive one call from this side, and another call from the other, so we do what we can but we can’t respond to everything.”

Many of the people who have left the countryside have gone to Garissa town, about 150km (90 miles) south of Lagdera. The town’s three hospitals have reported an increase in patient numbers in recent months, but at least the facilities have underground boreholes, running water and storage facilities – for now.

Unicef said about 3,000 men, women and children have arrived in the town this year from Wajir, another northern region severely affected by the drought. The UN agency estimates that about 80% were unwell or had injuries when they arrived.

“We are now seeing internally displaced people within Kenya for the first time in this crisis,” says Abdullahi. “This is placing an enormous pressure on hospitals in the main towns in drought-affected regions, which are responding to influxes of patients from a widening area.”

At Garissa town’s Iftin hospital, the waiting areas are full and workers bustle around the corridors. A line of patients wait outside the malnutrition centre.

“Resources are getting finished earlier than expected – we are really feeling the pinch,” says Bishar Hassan, the hospital chief. “For now we are able to handle it, but we are concerned that the cases of waterborne diseases may flare up.”

Garissa is still battling a cholera outbreak, which began in October, trigged by the severe drought. The World Health Organization says 7,800 cases have been recorded in the country.

Kenya’s Ministry of Health has launched an oral vaccine campaign to reach 2.2 million people.

Unicef has also rehabilitated 21 boreholes in Garissa and begun prospecting for underground water sources in a number of northern counties. This involves using specialist equipment to more accurately track where water might be found and improve drilling rates.

“The key is to build the capacity of county governments to manage scarce water resources in ways that suit the environment and climate,” says Abdullahi. “The anticipation of future needs is vital.”

Death without answers: an agonising 24-hour hunt for medical help in Guinea-Bissau

Bernardo Catchura spent a last desperate night seeking treatment in the healthcare system he had spent decades campaigning to improve. His wife is still unsure how he died

In their 15 years together, Maimuna Catchura had not known her husband to be ill. But one night in late January, 39-year-old lawyer, activist and musician Bernardo Catchura could not sleep, and complained of severe stomach pain.

The pain forced Catchura from his bed at his house in Bissau, Guinea-Bissau’s capital. That night he would navigate the country’s medical care maze, visiting pharmacies, clinics and hospitals. Before the night was through, he even considered crossing the border into Senegal to get help.

But wherever he looked, no one was available to help the father of three, and less than 24 hours after his pains began, he was dead. It was a sad fate for the man who had spent decades campaigning for improvements to Guinea-Bissau’s healthcare system.

Catchura was a leading member of the activist band Cientistas Realistas, which used music to reach and mobilise young people and protest against government failings. “What happened was exactly what he was always talking about in his songs about the health system,” says his widow, Maimuna.

A country with a population of 1.9 million in west Africa, Guinea-Bissau boasts well-conserved environmental parks and a proud history of hard-fought national liberation. But its people face chronic instability and economic inequality. Almost 70% of the population live on less than $1.90 a day and more than 10% are food insecure. The life expectancy is 58 years.

Healthcare experts say that at every step on the road to medical attention patients face potholes such as fake medication, shortages of equipment and medical expertise, and frequent strikes by health workers.

"What happened was exactly what he was always talking about in his songs about the health system"

Maimuna Catchura, Bernardo's widow

When painkillers were not helping, Catchura called a private clinic. No one answered the phone so a friend drove him and his wife to the public military hospital in Bissau.

Most roads are unpaved, but because January is in dry season, the drive only took 20 minutes and was relatively smooth. In rainy season, torrential downpours leave craters in the city’s red earth and make travel difficult.

At the military hospital medics said Catchura needed surgery, but that they had no facilities to operate. They sent him on to the country’s largest public hospital, Simão Mendes.

But Guinea-Bissau was in the grip of a national health workers’ strike, and despite its status as a referral hospital that should offer specialised treatment, no one at Simão Mendes was qualified to treat Catchura, his family say.

Aissatu Forbs Djalo, a doctor at Simão Mendes and member of the national health workers’ union, says salaries are too low and often go unpaid. Doctors are paid on average £250 a month and nurses up to £130.

“The government budget does not allow the health system to pay the doctors what they need,” says Djalo.

Political instability has crippled public services, especially healthcare. In 2016, Guinea-Bissau had one doctor for every 10,000 people.

There have been 10 completed or attempted coups in the country since independence in 1974.

“Until we have a stable government, which can complete its tenure, we will not be able to stabilise the public sector,” says Dr Magda Robalo, high commissioner for Covid-19 and a former health minister. “For you to have money to pay workers, you need to be able to collect money.

“There is no supervision and performance reviews. There is no meritocracy.”

A doctor who owned a private clinic advised Catchura to go there. But when he arrived at the one-story, blue and white building, the lights were out. The clinic had closed for the evening.

Catchura considered embarking on the four-hour car ride to neighbouring Senegal. Travelling outside the country for even mild health complaints is commonplace but he was, by now, in intense pain.

“A lot of people die from diseases that can be prevented,” says Djalo. “If someone has a cardiovascular illness, they may die due to lack of specialists, and we do not have diagnostic equipment.”

Simão Mendes had a partnership with a hospital in Senegal where it could send patients, but Covid restrictions ended it.

At 7am, Catchura and his wife returned to the private clinic, where he waited four hours to be admitted. Maimuna went home to make soup for her husband. She was sure he would be hungry when he returned from surgery. But there was no operation.

Catchura died and Maimuna still doesn’t know the cause. Failure to identify reasons for death are another common occurrence in Guinea-Bissau, where Djalo says there are few pathologists.

Robalo says there are many hurdles to fixing the broken system, but one approach would be to bolster community health provision, which has worked in other countries. “We can build a bottom-up system that can take care of people far away from the hospitals,” she says. According to Unicef, 66% of the population live more than 3 miles from a health centre.

What happened to Catchura amounts to negligence, says his friend, fellow activist and band member Lesmes Monteiro, but the circumstances are all too common. “There are a lot of Bernardos.”

Maimuna, dressed in widow’s black, has tears streaming down her face as she talks about her husband. He wanted their three children to study, she says. “Bernardo was always focused on school.”

School is cancelled because of Covid-19 and teachers’ strikes, but under the mid-morning sunlight the two oldest children study on the veranda, heads buried in books, as their father’s once had been, hoping to improve his country.

Immunologist Akiko Iwasaki: 'We are not done with Covid, not even close'

The Yale professor and long Covid expert on why the virus is causing ongoing illness for so many, and the challenges she faces as a woman of colour in science

According to the most recent estimates, more than 65 million people worldwide may be living with some form of long Covid, a startling number that will only continue to increase, given the lack of available treatment options.

One of the scientists leading the race to try to unravel the complexities of long Covid is Akiko Iwasaki, an immunology professor at Yale School of Medicine. Iwasaki has been at the forefront of numerous research breakthroughs throughout the course of the pandemic, from understanding why men were more vulnerable to the Sars-CoV-2 virus, the autoimmunity that made some people unexpectedly susceptible, and why a small minority have experienced heart inflammation in response to the Covid-19 vaccines. Most recently, Iwasaki has been awarded the prestigious Else Kröner Fresenius Prize for Medical Research, worth €2.5m (£2.2m), in part due to her ongoing work on long Covid.

Are we getting closer to understanding some of the causes of long Covid?

Long Covid is a blanket term that likely describes multiple diseases with different causes. We still don’t have the answers, but there are some hypotheses that are becoming more likely and others less likely. There’s more evidence now showing either viral proteins or viral RNA in various tissues, months after infection. The hypothesis that long Covid symptoms could be caused by the reactivation of latent viruses such as Epstein-Barr virus is also gaining momentum. The other idea is that changes can occur due to the inflammation from an acute Sars-CoV-2 infection, both at the site of infection, and in distal organs such as the brain. We have a paper that we published last year which demonstrates that even a mild Sars-CoV-2 respiratory infection can result in long term changes in the brain.

More than 200 symptoms have now been associated with long Covid, affecting almost every organ system in the human body. Many are also experienced by chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) sufferers. What similarities have been found in the biology of these two illnesses?

One you’ve probably heard of is microclots, which appear to be happening in a large fraction of people from long Covid and potentially ME/CFS. These are tiny little clots in the blood that may be impairing oxygen exchange and other important functions of the circulation. The way blood oxygen is being utilised by tissues also appears to be impaired, which could be due to microclots as well as mitochondrial dysfunction.

I always have in the back of my mind – how can these insights from long Covid help people with ME/CFS and other post-acute phases of infections, like post Lyme disease? I’m so excited about receiving this new award because it shows that long Covid and ME/CFS are diseases of global significance. It’s validation and acknowledgment for people who have been suffering for decades with ME/CFS, a disease that has been mostly ignored and completely understudied given the amount of suffering it has caused.

What new treatment avenues are being explored for long Covid?

We are starting a clinical trial where 50 patients will be treated with the antiviral drug Paxlovid and 50 will be given a placebo. This is to probe whether persistent virus infection may be causing long Covid in a subset of people. We’re not giving them the conventional five-day course, but a 15-day course of treatment, to see if that can eliminate the source of the problem, which is the remnants of replicating virus.

You’re a prolific tweeter, with more than 200,000 Twitter followers. How important a platform is it for scientific communication?

I didn’t plan to have so many followers! I now have to be even more careful what I say, and how I say things because it is very easy to be misinterpreted. But Twitter has been an incredible platform. Within seconds, people can read about the latest scientific findings, and what they mean. I also often learn from people who are posting their symptoms and what has helped them. I think it’s still very important for me to keep tweeting fact-based scientific content – there’s a lot of misinformation and disinformation out there.

But there are some days where I feel like I don’t even want to open it. The unfortunate side is that there are a lot of trolls and abusive comments, sometimes people with extreme viewpoints that clash with mine, or those who still don’t believe that long Covid is real and think it’s all in people’s heads.

You’ve also spoken about toxic environments in real life, particularly in academia, where you’ve called out issues of bullying and sexism.

This is still a big problem. Somehow bullying and mistreatment of junior staff has never been punished. People just keep doing it, and they get promoted and receive grants. This bullying occurs because many professors hold so much power that goes unchecked. Students and postdoctoral researchers rely on their recommendation letters to get their next job, so they can essentially be held hostage.

You’ve also mentioned how being a prominent woman of colour in science means that you have to endure a greater degree of toxic behaviour from other academics. Do you think there is a racism issue within the scientific community?

I think so. It’s very masked and veiled so it’s hard to pinpoint but I definitely feel like I’m spending more time thinking about how to respond to an email, because of my background, because I’m a woman, and because I’m a person of colour. There’s a lot of finessing of the words and making sure it’s assertive enough but doesn’t sound offensive. This struggle, and one that I’m sure others are going through, is double the work.

Another challenge is that you get asked to serve on every committee, because they need to make every committee diverse and equitable. I get that, but it just means more work for people like myself, and less time to spend on research.

Earlier this month, the World Health Organization downgraded Covid-19 from the status of “emergency of international concern”, while the Biden administration has officially declared an end to the Covid-19 public health emergency. What is your perspective on this – could the pandemic still have some twists to come?

I understand why the emergency declaration had to be ended, because of the economic impact and other things. But at the same time, we are not done with Covid, not even close. The virus is here to stay with us and that’s why we do need to think about future booster vaccines that match with the circulating variants, as well as the potential of new variants that further evade our existing immunity.

I get that people want to move on from the pandemic, but the virus is still out there, people are getting infected, and there’s the possibility of developing long Covid. I’m still wearing masks and following preventive practices as much as possible.

NHS data breach: trusts shared patient details with Facebook without consent

Observer investigation reveals Meta Pixel tool passed on private details of web browsing on medical sites

NHS trusts are sharing intimate details about patients’ medical conditions, appointments and treatments with Facebook without consent and despite promising never to do so.

An Observer investigation has uncovered a covert tracking tool in the websites of 20 NHS trusts which has for years collected browsing information and shared it with the tech giant in a major breach of privacy.

The data includes granular details of pages viewed, buttons clicked and keywords searched. It is matched to the user’s IP address – an identifier linked to an individual or household – and in many cases details of their Facebook account.

Information extracted by Meta Pixel can be used by Facebook’s parent company, Meta, for its own business purposes – including improving its targeted advertising services.

Records of information sent to the firm by NHS websites reveal it includes data which – when linked to an individual – could reveal personal medical details.

It was collected from patients who visited hundreds of NHS webpages about HIV, self-harm, gender identity services, sexual health, cancer, children’s treatment and more.

It also includes details of when web users clicked buttons to book an appointment, order a repeat prescription, request a referral or to complete an online counselling course. Millions of patients are potentially affected.

This weekend, 17 of the 20 NHS trusts that were using Meta Pixel confirmed they had pulled the tracking tool from their websites.

Eight issued apologies to patients. Multiple trusts said they had originally installed the tracking pixels to monitor recruitment or charity campaigns and were not aware that they were sending patient data to Facebook. The Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) is investigating.

The Observer can reveal:

In one case, Buckinghamshire Healthcare NHS trust shared when a user viewed a patient handbook for HIV medication. The name of the drug and the NHS trust were sent to the company along with the user’s IP address and details of their Facebook user ID.

Alder Hey Children’s trust in Liverpool, sent Facebook details when users visited webpages for sexual development problems, crisis mental health services and eating disorders. It also shared data when users clicked to order repeat prescriptions.

The Tavistock and Portman NHS foundation trust in London shared data with Facebook when users clicked the information page for its gender identity service, which specialises in working with children who have gender dysphoria. Data was also shared when users viewed the webpage for the Portman Clinic, which “offers specialist help with disturbing sexual behaviours”, and clicked for details on how to be referred to the service.

Surrey and Borders Partnership NHS trust shared data with Facebook when a patient clicked buttons indicating they were under 18, lived in Brighton and wanted to access mental health services.

Other NHS trusts sent detailed receipts to Facebook when users accessed pages for appointment bookings or completed online self-help courses. Barts Health NHS trust, which serves a population of 2.5 million in London, shared data with Facebook when a user clicked to “cancel or change an appointment” or added a visit to a particular hospital to their itinerary.

The Royal Marsden, a specialist cancer centre, sent data on patients requesting referrals, viewing information about private care and browsing pages for particular cancer types.

The findings have caused alarm among privacy experts who said they indicated widespread potential breaches of data protection and patient confidentiality that were “completely unacceptable”.

Information sent to the company is likely to include special category health data, which has extra protection in law and is defined as information “about an individual’s past, current or future health status”, including medical conditions, tests and treatment and “any related data which reveals anything about the state of someone’s health”. Using or sharing it without explicit consent or another lawful basis is illegal.

Once the data reaches Facebook’s servers, it is not possible to track exactly how it is used. The company says it prohibits organisations from sending it sensitive health information and has filters to weed such data out when it is received by mistake.

Professor David Leslie, director of ethics at the Alan Turing Institute, said the transfer of data to third parties by the NHS risked damaging the “delicate relationship of trust” with patients. “Our reasonable expectation when we’re accessing an NHS website is that our data won’t be extracted and shared with third-party commercial entities that could [use it] for targeting ads or linking our personal identities to health conditions,” he said.

Wolfie Christl, a data privacy expert who has investigated the ad tech industry, said: “This should have been stopped by regulators a long time ago. It is irresponsible, even negligent, and it must stop.”

He accused Meta of doing too little to monitor what information it was being sent. “Meta says we don’t permit certain types of data being sent to us but they haven’t spent enough on resources to audit this,” Christl said.

In most cases, the information sent to Facebook during a test by the Observer was transferred automatically upon loading a website – before the user had selected to “accept” or “decline” cookies – and without explicit consent. Only three of the 20 trusts mentioned Facebook or Meta in their privacy policies at all. Several of the trusts had previously promised patients that their information would not be shared or used for marketing.

Collectively, the 20 NHS trusts found using the tracking tool serve a population of more than 22 million people in England, stretching from Devon to the Pennines. Some had been using it for several years.

One of the trusts that pulled the tracking tool this weekend, Buckinghamshire Healthcare NHS trust, had previously said in its privacy policy that “confidential personal information about your health and care … would never be used for marketing purposes without your explicit consent”.

In a statement, the trust apologised to patients and said the Meta Pixel had been active on its website in error. “It was installed in relation to a recruitment campaign, and we were not aware that Meta was using this information for marketing purposes,” a spokesperson said. “Immediate action has been taken to remove it.”

Alder Hey said it asked visitors to its website for permission to use cookies and said patients’ names and addresses had not been shared. It has removed the tracking tool.

The Royal Marsden said it regularly reviewed its privacy policies but did not say whether it planned to remove the pixel. Barts said it was removing trackers from its website “following the disclosure that they were being used to extract personal information beyond the purpose for which they were originally installed, which was to measure responses to recruitment advertising campaigns.”

Several said they were unaware of how data would be used and apologised to patients for failing to get consent. Aside from the 17 who pulled or are pulling the tool, Hertfordshire Partnership trust and Royal Marsden said they were investigating the issues internally and only the Tavistock and Portman did not respond to requests for comment.

The ICO said it had “noted the findings” and was considering the matter. “People have the right to expect that organisations will handle their information securely and that it will only be used for the purpose they are told,” a spokesperson said.

Revelations about the NHS use of Meta Pixel come after regulators in the US issued warnings over the use of tracking tools there. Last summer, tech website The Markup exposed their use on the websites of healthcare providers. In December, the Biden administration warned that using tracking pixels to collect patient data without consent was a potential federal law violation.

Several leading US hospitals are currently being sued by their patients over their use of the pixels, which are tiny pieces of code that are invisible during normal browsing.

Meta is also facing legal action over accusations of knowingly receiving sensitive health information – including from pages within patient portals – and not taking steps to stop it. The plaintiffs claim Meta violated their medical privacy by intercepting “individually identifiable health information” from its partner websites and “monetising” it.

Jeffrey Koncius, a partner at Kiesel Law in California and one of the attorneys leading the action, said the data transfer by the NHS websites appeared similar to what was happening in the US. “Imagine if a hospital sent a letter to Mark Zuckerberg and said, ‘We want you to know that Jeff Koncius is our patient,’” he said. “That’s exactly what’s happening here. It’s just happening electronically.”

The Liberal Democrat health spokesperson Daisy Cooper described the findings as a “shocking discovery” that raised serious questions about the protection of patient information. “The NHS must investigate how this happened and how widespread this alleged data breach is,” she said.

NHS England said individual trusts were responsible for ensuring they followed data protection laws. “The NHS is looking into this issue and will take further action if necessary,” a spokesperson said.

"The NHS must investigate how this happened and how widespread this alleged data breach is"

Daisy Cooper, MP

Meta said it had contacted the trusts to remind them of its policies, which prohibited organisations from sending it health data. “We educate advertisers on properly setting up business tools to prevent this from occurring,” the spokesperson said. They added it was website owner’s responsibility to ensure it complied with data protection laws and had obtained consent before sending data.

The company did not answer questions about the effectiveness of its filters designed to weed out “potentially sensitive data”, or which types of information they would block from hospital websites – or say why it permitted NHS trusts to send it data at all, given the high risk it could reveal details about the web user’s health.

“Like any technology, our filters won’t be able to catch everything all of the time. However, we are constantly improving our mechanisms to make sure we catch as much as we can,” a spokesperson said.

The company offers its business tools to advertisers, saying they can help them use health-based advertising to “grow your business”. In one guide, it says data collected through its business tools can improve users’ Facebook experience by showing them ads they “might be interested in”. “You may see ads for hotel deals if you visit travel websites,” it explains.

Sam Smith, at medConfidential, a data privacy campaign group, said it was never appropriate for the tools to be used to collect health information. “There’s no benefit to NHS trusts in giving this information away. It’s like asking a tobacco company to sponsor a cancer ward,” he said. “NHS England is tacitly approving this by not enforcing anything better.”

Tories ‘at risk from rightwing insurgency’ warns donor Lord Cruddas

Peer says Conservatives no longer party of centre right and are threatened by Reform UK, Brexit party successor, if Nigel Farage takes leadership

The Conservative party is under threat from a rightwing insurgency after a “drag to the left” under Rishi Sunak, one of its biggest recent donors has warned, amid growing tensions on the Tory right.

Peter Cruddas, the peer who has given the party more than £3.5m, said the Conservatives were “no longer a centre-right party” under Sunak, adding that he refused to back it financially until it changed course.

His intervention comes as the latest Opinium poll for the Observer shows support for Reform, the successor to the Brexit party, is up to 8% of the vote – up 2 points and almost neck-and-neck with the Lib Dems. The poll also found that a fifth of voters (19%) are considering voting for Reform. This includes 23% of 2019 Conservative voters and 11% of 2019 Labour voters.

In a sign of the political pressures already facing Sunak, Cruddas, a former Tory co-treasurer, said that the recent tax-raising budget, as well as policies over Brexit and immigration, meant the party could face a threat from Reform should Nigel Farage opt to lead it in the run-up to the next election.

“There is a conduit for right-leaning, centre-right people to find a new home and that’s the Reform party, especially if Farage comes out and says he is going to lead the Reform party,” he told the Observer. “What you’re seeing today is a coup and a hijacking of the Conservative party by centre-left leaning people. The senior Conservatives that I’ve spoken to are also frustrated. Something’s going to come to a head because the members don’t want Rishi Sunak. The odds are stacked against him.

“So long as the party is a centre-left party, then I don’t consider it a Conservative party. I will donate to the Conservative party, the true Conservative party, which is a centre-right party. I will not donate to any centre-left party.”

Meanwhile, Richard Tice, the current Reform leader, told the Observer the Tories had “betrayed the country” including over Brexit. “I want the Tories out,” he said. “I want them destroyed. They have ruined our economy. People are underestimating us. They don’t believe we will stand in 630 seats. I have already got 600.”

He added: “Nigel [Farage] rang me up the other day and said the day we get 8%, remember this day. It took Ukip 19 years to get to 8%.”

The challenge demonstrates the difficulties facing Sunak as he attempts to stabilise his party’s fortunes, end internal feuding and restore faith in the economy. Some Tories believe that having won huge numbers of pro-Brexit voters at the last election, they are now more vulnerable to the emergence of a party on the right. While Reform’s support remains low, it could end up costing the Tories seats should it win over a chunk of voters.

MPs told the Observer that they believed the issue of refugees crossing the Channel in small boats risked driving voters to back Reform. Jonathan Gullis, the red wall Tory MP who led a rebellion over asylum policies last week, warned there would be political consequences for failing to tackle the issue.

“If the Conservative party doesn’t deliver on stopping illegal immigration and getting people deported to Rwanda, Albania and other safe countries, the Conservative party will be sacked by the electorate and Rishi Sunak will be the leader of the opposition, not the prime minister, after the next general election,” he said. “Reform will come along, take enough of our vote to let Labour sneak through the middle and get back into power. We need to show that we can deliver.”

A former cabinet minister said: “[MPs] are right to worry. If we fail to deliver on small boats, that flank will be wide open. But in fairness to the government, they have shown clear direction in this regard.”

Cruddas, who was handed his peerage by Boris Johnson, led a campaign over the summer to have Johnson reinstated as a leadership candidate. He is now funding the newly-formed Conservative Democratic Organisation, which aims to give members more power over MP selections and leadership elections. He said that thousands of members were already involved and that he would use his “deep pockets” to ensure the party changed course.

“What we’ve seen since 2010 is an engineering of the Conservative party to take us to the centre, possibly to the left, and there’s a lot of MPs out there that we consider are not Conservative,” he said. “We are a centre-right, Conservative organisation that wants to empower the members and stick to our principles. We think the Conservative party has been infiltrated by non-Conservatives.

“Jeremy Hunt, who failed twice to become leader of the party, is now chancellor of the exchequer. Following that anti-Conservative budget, it convinced me that the Conservative party now is no longer a centre-right party.”

Other senior Tories are urging their colleagues not to panic over a potential threat from the right. David Davis, the former Brexit secretary, said: “The best vaccination against extreme parties is the success of sensible policies. The more successful the government’s policies are on economics and on migrants, the safer my colleagues will be in their seats from any attack from any direction. The most important thing for them to remember is not to distract from the delivery of that success in the next six months to a year.”

The threat from the right played a major role in the toppling of previous Tory leaders David Cameron and Theresa May. The success of Ukip in 2014 European elections contributed to Cameron’s decision to hold the EU referendum. Meanwhile, May was finally removed after the Brexit party secured 30% of the vote in the 2019 European elections. Conservatives concerned about the current threat stress that Reform would only need to secure a fraction of that support to have an impact on the Tory performance at the next election.

'People find us easy targets': Women politicians face a torrent of online abuse but say they won't stop their work

Doreen Nyanjura is a modern politician. She announced on Twitter that she would be standing in Uganda's 2026 presidential election; has a name for her supporters -- the Nyanjuraholics -- and has characterized her platform with a catchy hashtag: #ThePoliticalAntidote.

But with this presence online, Nyanjura says she faces the now-standard challenges of being a woman in politics: in addition to the tweets of support or derision that most politicians on social media have become accustomed to, Nyanjura also receives tweets of misogynistic mockery.

"The table you are shaking is for Bigbouys [sic] not slayers my dear. Don't even waste your capital unless there's something you're running after," one person said, responding to Nyanjura's announcement that she intends to run in Uganda's 2026 presidential election against Muhoozi Kaneirugaba, the son of current president Yoweri Museveni -- if he runs.

"First get married then contest on the presidential seat, (because) you can't rule (people) who are married. What would you be advising them?" asked another.

As the Deputy Lord Mayor of Kampala, Uganda's capital city, Nyanjura is no stranger to personal attacks online, which she tells CNN increased in volume after she took on her mayoral appointment nearly three years ago, and cover everything from the length of her hair to her age and marital status.

"The fact that I am single was another reason for the bullying with many saying that it was the reason I got the position," insinuating that she had used sex to get ahead, Nyanjura tells CNN. People will say "I am not responsible because I am not married," she says. And if they ever saw her with a man, even just standing next to one, "they would want to make it an issue."

The 33-year-old politician, who was a student activist at Makerere University in Kampala before entering into politics in 2016 and joining the Forum for Democratic change (FDC), one of Uganda's main opposition parties, says that the harassment she gets on social media and messaging platforms is worse when she advocates for gender equality.

"Many feel advocating for equity and equality is an abuse of culture and religious beliefs. For all my posts advocating for gender equity, I receive abuse or insults," Nyanjura explains, adding that her advocacy posts on social media usually get lifted and shared across several WhatsApp groups, followed by abuse on all platforms.

Nyanjura goes on: threats of "physical attacks happen when I am planning a demonstration and posting about them on social media ... I get threats of being arrested or being carried in a 'drone' (a nickname given to the vans that have reportedly been used in arrests of political activists in Uganda). So, I stay away from my home at such times and ask my family members to do the same," she told CNN.

At first, the abuse made her feel awful, she says, but aware that her abusers want to silence her Nyanjura tells CNN that she's decided to stand her ground and be a positive example for other women in public life.

"There are so many women who are not on any of these media platforms (but) if I am to go off social media because I have been bullied, what example am I creating for other women that are following me, my posts, my videos and pick encouragement from me?"

One in two Ugandan women in public life targeted

Recent surveys in Uganda have revealed stark numbers highlighting how common it is for women to be targeted online.

The research, led by the feminist tech collective Pollicy in 2020, found that one in three (32.8%) women between the ages of 18 and 65 surveyed in Uganda said they have experienced gender-based online violence. A 2021 study found that this increased among women leaders and high-profile women, with 50% experiencing trolling.

"Many of them stopped using the apps and stopped organizing online," says Irene Mwendwa, Director of Strategic Initiatives at Pollicy.

The 2021 study found that the use of social media platforms by women politicians to engage with voters was low compared to men and, Mwendwa says, in the lead up to the 2021 election, "the numbers continued to decrease due to the online abuse that (women) were facing."

Another 2021 study on women in Africa's parliaments, conducted by the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and the African Parliamentary Union (APU), further found that 42% of women parliamentarians have received "death threats, rape threats, or threats of beating or abduction, usually online."

The report, the second by the IPU, following one in 2018 on European parliaments, found that in comparison "online attacks are also common but lower than in Europe," attributing the difference to "greater disparities in women's access to the internet between the two regions."

When Olive Namazzi decided to go into politics, she believed she would have a rewarding public life. But Namazzi, who, like Nyanjura, is 34 and in the FDC, says she hadn't realized that stepping into the political arena as a woman -- and one with a disability -- would kick off a campaign of cyberbullying that would last for more than a decade. 

As part of its commitments, the FDC prioritizes women's empowerment. In her role overseeing health, education, environment and sports for the Kampala City Council, Namazzi says social media is a vital tool to help make her work in the community visible and to build voter support. But it is also a space she says she must defend herself against a torrent of abuse.

Speaking on why women politicians and public figures experience more cyberbullying than their male colleagues, Namazzi tells CNN: "People find us easy targets. Once you are a woman who is known, you are a likely candidate for bullying."

An accident in 2013 left her with a limp, for which she wears specially made shoes. For her detractors, this is something to mock. She described an exchange in a WhatsApp group she's in: "I was trying to reason somebody out intellectually and then somebody (else) came and started abusing me that I put on shoes that are not balancing. He started telling me about how I can't balance when I am walking," Namazzi says. "It was below the belt."

In another WhatsApp group, this time a private group chat with other politicians, Namazzi says remarks were made about the age at which she got married and started a family. "What I find interesting is that sometimes these abuses are from our very colleagues who are educated and whom we expect to understand us," she says, adding: "This is on a platform of leaders. It was very bad."

Namazzi and Nyanjura's experiences are supported by the IPU and APU's 2021 research, which found that the majority of abuse women parliamentarians face, comes from their male peers, especially those from rival parties. The report also found that women parliamentarians who live with disabilities as well as those who are unmarried, under 40, and from minority groups, suffer more violence. As Nyanjura's account shows, women MPs who promote women's rights and gender equality are also targeted, the report found.

A law in place for over a decade

This online abuse of women politicians is happening in a country that has had a cybersecurity law in place for more than a decade.

Uganda's Computer Misuse Act initially prohibited offensive communication and cyber harassment and was amended in 2022 to add hate speech to the list. The offensive communication part was ruled unconstitutional earlier this year, but cyber harassment is punishable by a fine of "up to seven hundred and fifty currency points" or imprisonment up to seven years, or both.

However, experts and human rights organizations have long raised concerns that rather than protect populations vulnerable from trolling and harassment, such as women in politics, its vague terminology, even following the recent amendment, can lead instead to the law being used to silence activists or opponents of the government.

This "undermines the ability and efficacy (of laws) as tools against cybercrime," says Eron Kiiza, a human rights lawyer and member of the Uganda Law Society Rule of Law Committee. Kiiza adds that cyber laws are typically "vaguely drafted and prone to legal challenges," which "brings problems when cases are taken to court."

Multiple legal and women's right's experts told CNN that the challenges with using the law to successfully prosecute online harassment results in women deciding not to report abuses to the relevant authorities.

For Namazzi, the police are of no help, she says. "Authorities do not consider online bullying to be as serious as physical bullying and therefore do not treat it with the severity that it needs," she tells CNN.

CNN reached out the Uganda Police Force and the Justice Ministry for comment, but they did not respond.

Experts and activists in the country say that better-targeted protections are needed to ensure women stay vocal and visible in Ugandan politics and feel confident sharing their work and views as much as men in the same positions of power.

"We really need the women's voice to change the way that economies and politics and social policies are made," says Brigitte Filion, gender equality programme officer for the Inter-Parliamentary Union. "When there are women in parliaments, there is also more laws and policies on issues like violence against women and gender-related issues... It will be a very big loss for society in general if women are not involved equally in politics," she says.

Learning how to respond to abuse

With laws failing to protect women, civil society organizations like Pollicy have spent years creating national and regional programs to help women protect themselves online.

"Less than a quarter of African national parliamentarians and local government are women," explains Pollicy's Mwendwa. "Digital upskilling will enable women politicians to scale up their work, their careers (and) their communities."

Mwendwa's team created a digital game, Digital safe-tea, in which you enter the lives of three fictional women to learn about the digital threats they face on a regular basis, including "Zoom bombing" (intrusion of a zoom call by a troll), impersonation and sexually explicit imagery shared without consent.

People "weave through the maze of threats which are presented with lessons on how to navigate such threats in real life," Mwendwa explains.

The game helped Namazzi learn how to respond to her bullies. "It taught me when to ignore and how to block bullies. It guided me on how to report bullying to the platforms where it was happening," she tells CNN.

Pollicy also runs training events for women policymakers. In February, Mwendwa says 90 women from Uganda, Tanzania and Senegal came together as part of the Vote: Women program. Here, participants were able to share personal experiences as well as get training in digital resilience, combatting online violence and harassment, and engaging safely in public debate. Both Nyanjura and Namazzi attended the event.

"Rather than cower to the bullies, I have chosen to stay on"

Multiple organizations are working with Uganda's beleaguered women politicians to achieve what they say the laws in place are failing to accomplish, including the Women of Uganda Network (WOUGNET), an NGO that promotes the use of technology among women, girls and women's rights organizations, formerly run by Peace Amuge as Executive Director.

WOUGNET, now active for more than 20 years, works with women leaders to not just address their own experiences of abuse but also to better legislate on these issues. Amuge points out that while the hate speech amendment does mention gender, Uganda's Computer Misuse Act does not specifically cover online gender-based violence, which they are advocating for.

She agrees that online engagement can be an effective tool in politics, but warns that many women are avoiding online platforms for fear of abuse. But Nyanjura and Namazzi are determined to stay engaged and to stay in politics, despite the costs.

"I almost ran mad engaging a bully for two days nonstop," says Namazzi. "But I was determined to be a politician against the odds of any kind of intimidation...Rather than cower to the bullying, I have chosen to stay on and attack them right back."

"I want to tell (other women) when you stand up, (harassers) will eventually leave you alone," says Nyanjura before adding: "If women do not embrace the digital world, they are definitely going to be left behind."

The Ugandan Ministry of Information and Communication Technology did not respond to any of CNN's multiple requests for comment.

As the West surges toward electric cars, here’s where the unwanted gas guzzlers go

Standing on the stony ground in the bustling Fifa Park car lot, Rokeeb Yaya is haggling over the price of a dark red car. It is one of a couple hundred vehicles, parked in long lines stretching out across the vast lot – some shiny and new-looking, others dented and dusty.

The car Yaya has his eye on, a 2008 US-built Ford Escape, is on sale for around $4,000. It’s relatively affordable – US cars are cheaper than most other brands in the lot – and he wants to upgrade from his motorbike to a car. He is not interested in the history of the vehicle, he said, only that he can afford it.

But how this Ford ended up here – in one of the biggest car lots in the port city of Cotonou – helps tell a bigger story about how many of the West’s gas-guzzling cars are starting second lives in West Africa.

The 14-year old Ford arrived in Benin from the United States last year, after being sold at an auto auction.

Car records reviewed by CNN show it had three previous owners in Virginia and Maryland, and has logged over 252,000 miles on the road. It had one previous recall for its power steering, but unlike some of the other cars on the lot, it arrived in a relatively sound condition – it hadn’t been in any reported accidents.

This aging SUV is just one of millions of used cars that arrive every year in West Africa from wealthy countries such as Japan, South Korea, European countries and, increasingly, the US. Many of these end up in Benin, one of Africa’s top importers of used vehicles.

The stream of used cars heading to West African ports is only expected to increase with the West’s shift to electric vehicles. As wealthy countries set aggressive goals to move consumers towards electric vehicles to cut planet-warming pollution, gas-powered cars won’t necessarily go away.

Instead, many will be shipped thousands of miles away to developing countries like Benin, where populations are growing, along with demand for used cars.

Experts say the effect will be to divert climate and environmental problems to countries that are the most vulnerable to the climate crisis, undermining their own attempts to cut planet-warming pollution.

Exploding demand

The global market for used light-duty vehicles grew nearly 20% from 2015 to 2019, when more than 4.8 million were exported. There was a slight dip in exports in 2020 when the Covid pandemic started, but numbers are now “growing quite rapidly,” United Nations Environment Programme official Rob de Jong told CNN.

The US exports about 18% of the world’s used vehicles, according to UNEP data. These travel all over the globe, including to the Middle East and Central America, but many go to Nigeria, Benin and Ghana.

Some of these are salvaged cars that have been in accidents, were flooded, or are just too old – which get auctioned off for parts. Others are whole used cars that US car dealers are looking to offload.

“A lot of them are going to be two- to five-year-old Hyundais, Toyotas, sedans,” said Dmitriy Shibarshin, marketing director for West Coast Shipping, a company that specializes in shipping cars internationally. “It’s mostly the economy cars that get shipped there.”

Shibarshin’s company and others are “like FedEx” for cars, he said. His company usually specializes in higher-end vehicles, but also ships cheaper cars.

In major African countries like Kenya and Nigeria, more than 90% of the cars and trucks are used vehicles from overseas. In Kenya, where de Jong is based, the vehicle fleet has doubled every eight years; streets that used to be devoid of cars are now jammed with traffic, he said.

There is a tremendous appetite for these used vehicles. “You have a very young population that’s getting richer and richer by the day,” said Etop Ipke, the CEO of Autochek Africa, an online marketplace for cars. “The first thing they want to do, as they can afford things, is some mobility,” he said.

But, unlike in the US, few prospective buyers have access to credit, so new cars are often out of reach.

“That is fundamentally the reason why we’re not able to improve the quality” of cars sold, Ipke said. “It’s not like people want to drive used cars; it’s an affordability issue.”

Experts say demand for used cars could explode further as the take up of electric cars in the West increases the supply of used cars to African countries. Nearly one in five vehicles sold globally this year will be electric, according to the International Energy Agency, compared to less than 5% in 2020. China, Europe and the US are leading the EV market, the agency said.

In states like New York and Florida, where consumers are buying more EVs, dealers are increasingly looking overseas as a place to sell their older gas-powered models, according to Matt Trapp, a regional vice president at the huge auto auction company Manheim.

Those states also have robust port operations, making them an ideal place to ship used cars to Africa. “It’s setting up a really complementary dynamic,” Trapp told CNN.

“I’m not surprised to see how robust the export game is becoming,” Trapp said. “We’re going to see this dynamic more and more. When [auto dealers] see demand in other markets, they will find a way to move the metal there.”

From UNEP’s perspective, not all gas-powered cars are concerning – it’s the older ones, which tend to pollute more and be less safe, De Jong said. There’s evidence that the increasing demand in Africa for vehicles is actually resulting in more old and salvaged cars being shipped to the continent recently than there were 20 years ago.

“What we see at the moment is a wide variety of used vehicles being exported from the global north to the global south,” de Jong said. “Not only is the number increasing, but the quality is decreasing.”

“Polluting or unsafe”

In one section of Fifa Park, CNN finds a 16-year-old Dodge Charger, worn by age.

“We just sold it for 3 million XOF [around $4,500],” its seller, who did not wish to be named, said of the vehicle that arrived in Benin from the US two years ago.

Parked across from the Charger is a 24-year-old Ford Winstar that was shipped to Benin from the US last year. It’s a cheaper alternative for low-income car buyers who cannot afford newer models.

Car dealer Abdul Koura said that US and Canadian cars are very desirable to importers, who often bring in cars that have been in accidents, he told CNN.

“They repair these cars and resell them to make a profit,” said Koura, whose space at Cotonou’s Fifa park includes more than 30 used vehicles imported from Canada.

Victor Ojoh, a Nigerian car dealer who frequents Fifa Park, told CNN that it’s often possible to tell the origin of a car by what’s wrong with it.

“The cars that smoke are mostly from the US,” said Ojoh. “The cars from Canada are mostly flooded cars that start developing electrical faults.”

Some imported vehicles are missing their catalytic converters, an exhaust emission control devices which filter toxic gasses. Catalytic converters contain valuable metals including platinum and can fetch up to $100 on the black market. Some of the cars are shipped without catalytic converters or have them removed by dealers upon arrival, Ojo said.

Millions of cars shipped to Africa and Asia from the US, Europe and Japan are “polluting or unsafe,” according to UNEP. “Often with faulty or missing components, they belch out toxic fumes, increasing air pollution and hindering efforts to fight climate change.”

Regulations aimed at reducing pollution and increasing the safety of imported cars into West Africa have tended to be weak. But attempts have been made recently to tighten them up.

In 2020, Benin and 14 other members of the Economic Community of West African States bloc agreed a set of vehicle emissions regulations in the region, including an age limit of 10 years for used vehicles and limits on the amount of carbon pollution cars are allowed to produce.

But it’s unclear how strictly they are being enforced.

UNEP officials, including de Jong, have also had conversations with US and EU officials about putting in new regulations that would crack down on shipping very old or junk cars to developing nations. Those conversations are in early stages and have yet to result in any commitments.

Still, de Jong said climate change and global emissions have made the conversation around used cars “a different ballgame.” Increased shipments of older and more polluting cars are just as much of a problem for developed nations as they are for the developing countries where they are being driven, he added.

“Today with climate change, it doesn’t really matter where the emissions are taking place,” de Jong said. “Whether in Washington, DC, or Lagos, it makes no difference.”

Ipke doesn’t think that it is inevitable that Africa will accept all the old gas-powered cars the West no longer wants. He hopes that the transition to electric vehicles will come to the African continent as well, although that will require significant improvements to the charging infrastructure.

“In terms of where Africa goes, the transition shouldn’t necessarily be from used cars to brand new combustion engines, it should be from used cars to EVs,” Ipke said. “I think the continent has to be prepared for EVs, used or brand new, because that’s the direction the world is taking.”

For Yaya, however, this all seems a long way off. What brought him to Fifa Park, and to the old Ford SUV, was a lack of other options.

“I can only purchase what my money can afford,” he said.

‘No one feels safe’: The Taliban promised to provide security to Afghans. New data shows threat from ISIS is growing

Qasim received a call in late March that his brother, an employee with Afghanistan’s Taliban government, had been seriously injured in a suicide bombing near the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Kabul.

The 32-year-old rushed to the hospital with his family, but when they got there he was told by the doctors his brother was already dead.

The explosion hit a security checkpoint as government employees were leaving work for the day. It struck at the heart of what was, until the collapse of the former Afghan government in August 2021, the capital’s heavily fortified diplomatic enclave, known as the “Green Zone.” The attack was later claimed by Islamic State Khorasan, or ISIS-K — the group’s second strike on the ministry this year, as it focuses its firepower on high-profile targets, attempting to undermine the Taliban’s rule and erode public confidence in its assurances of security.

“The Taliban are saying that they protect us, but really they cannot. Still we face threats from different groups in Afghanistan. I don’t know who is really behind these incidents, ISIS or others,” Qasim, who asked that his last name not be used due to security concerns, told CNN.

“Currently we don’t have security in Afghanistan at all, whenever we go out we don’t know if we will come home alive or not,” he added.

In the nearly two years since the Taliban seized control of Afghanistan, ISIS-K has scaled up the volume and complexity of attacks across the country, putting pressure on the new government and raising concerns in the West about the possible regeneration of a group that could once again pose a serious threat internationally.

ISIS-K and the Taliban, both Sunni Islamist extremist groups, are enemies with differing ideologies, fighting each other for control over parts of the country — and recruits.

ISIS-K’s recent attacks have largely been aimed at the Taliban and other symbolic targets, as well as at Afghanistan’s Shia Muslim minorities, in particular the ethnic Hazaras. Bombings have increased in urban areas, leaving hundreds injured and dead. Between late 2022 and early 2023, ISIS-K attacked the Pakistani and Russian embassies, hit a hotel where Chinese business representatives were staying and carried out an explosion at an air force compound.

The group has frequently published its claims in its weekly newsletter, Al Naba, alleging that it has struck on 283 occasions in Afghanistan since the Taliban’s takeover, killing at least 670 people and injuring 1,200 — a significant uptick in casualties per attack.

With media restrictions severely affecting journalists’ ability to report independently in the country, and an absence of Western intelligence, it’s difficult to verify these figures. In an address to the Security Council in March, the head of the UN Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Roza Otunbayeva, said that ISIS-K posed “a growing threat,” and raised concerns over the Taliban’s capacity to cope with that challenge. But the Taliban have insisted that it has full control.

In light of patchy information on the ground, analysts are increasingly turning to open sources to assess the state of play in Afghanistan.

Afghan Witness, a project run by the UK-based Centre for Information Resilience, which monitors human rights in the country, this week released a new dataset of verified abuses and violent incidents since the Taliban’s takeover. The data, which is available in a live map, includes 367 pieces of open-source evidence — largely videos and images shared on social media — about 70 ISIS-K attacks since August 2021. Taken together, they reveal a gradual shift in the group’s activities in Afghanistan — from a few small-scale attacks targeting Taliban patrols and checkpoints in rural areas, such as the eastern Nangarhar province, where ISIS has maintained a presence since 2015, to a concentration of attacks in urban areas, including in the capital, Kabul, Herat in the west, and Mazar-i-Sharif and Kunduz in the north.

Before the Taliban’s return to power, ISIS-K had not claimed any attacks in Mazar-i-Sharif, Afghanistan’s third most populous city, but since then the group has claimed nine, including a blast in March that killed the Taliban governor of Balkh province in his office. In the first year under the Taliban’s new government, ISIS-K claimed eight attacks in Kunduz city.

Afghan Witness’ data on verified attacks and ISIS-K claims reflect the group’s continued targeting of civilians, notably the Hazara community in Kabul, Herat and other cities, though attacks have slowed over the past few months as the group has focused on higher-profile Taliban targets.

“It is clear from the data and propaganda that they are pursuing elements of strategies used elsewhere, such as the targeting of minorities to promote sectarianism, and they have become increasingly bold in targeting high-profile and symbolic targets within Afghanistan,” said David Osborn, team leader of Afghan Witness.

“Recently, the Taliban appear to have conducted a series of raids against the Islamic State, coinciding with a reduced number of attacks by the group. This is the picture we get from open source but in the long term it is unclear how far the Taliban’s actions will blunt Islamic State-Khorasan’s capability inside Afghanistan,” he added.

Despite the Taliban’s promises of a more moderate form of rule than when they were last in power two decades ago, they have reintroduced harsh measures in line with their strict interpretation of Islamic law, or Sharia, including public executions, flogging and banning women from education and the workplace.

As the Taliban try to minimize the threat ISIS-K poses, attacks on civilians continue.

“We’ve seen Islamic State-Khorasan target Shia Hazara as they attend schools, mosques and festivities. What is most striking is the helplessness of those caught up in the violence and the constant state of instability and fear that is created by the attacks,” Osborn said of Afghan Witness’ research. These communities feel the de facto authorities won’t defend them, after years having been persecuted by the Taliban themselves, he added.

Nearly half of the attacks verified by Afghan Witness hit crowds as they gathered in public spaces, including markets, schools, hospitals, funerals, weddings and religious services.

In October 2021, two months after the US withdrawal, ISIS-K fighters bypassed Taliban security to access Imam Bargah Mosque, the largest Shia mosque in Kandahar, a city in the south of the country, during Friday prayers. They shot the temple guards, then detonated their explosive vests among the crowds, claiming to have killed and wounded more than 100 people. At the time, CNN was able to confirm more than 30 deaths.

A year later, in September 2022, a suicide bombing struck Kaaj Educational Center in Kabul’s Dasht-e-Barchi district — a predominantly Hazara and Shia neighborhood that had suffered several devastating ISIS-K attacks before the Taliban took over — killing at least 25 people. The students, many of them girls, were taking a practice university entrance exam. The attack, videos of which were verified by Afghan Witness, was not claimed by ISIS-K, but, according to analysts, bore the hallmarks of the group.

Earlier that month, Human Rights Watch (HRW) said that Taliban authorities “had an obligation to protect at-risk communities” from repeated ISIS-K attacks, but that those authorities were failing to provide them with security, based on interviews with 21 survivors and their family members. Richard Bennett, the UN special rapporteur on human rights in Afghanistan, has also called for investigations into attacks on Hazara, Shia and Sufi communities, which he described as bearing the hallmarks of “crimes against humanity.”

Fatima Amiri, 18, was among the students sitting the exam when gunfire erupted. She lost an ear and an eye in the attack that also shattered her jaw, and is still receiving medical treatment for her injuries. She recalls students screaming as a gunman opened fire on them at their desks, followed by the sound of an explosion, and her peers lying bloody around her on the floor.

“I saw many of my classmates were dying. I tried to escape. All the ways were closed. I climbed on a wall and jumped, I was in a bad condition full of blood,” she said. “I am now a half-normal human being with one eye and one ear.”

“We know that the Taliban cannot protect us. No one feels safe currently in Afghanistan.”

ISIS-K’s attacks have stoked anxiety among US officials about the group’s capabilities, with some warning that it could soon develop the ability to strike Western targets.

Gen. Michael “Erik” Kurilla, head of the US Central Command (CENTCOM), told lawmakers in March that ISIS-K had become more emboldened, aiming to grow its ranks and inspire or direct attacks in the region and beyond. He estimated that the group would be able to conduct “an external operation against US or Western interests abroad in under six months, with little to no warning.” Pressed about where terrorist attacks originating in Afghanistan might be directed, Kurilla said Europe or Asia were more likely targets than the United States.

Kurilla’s statement highlights one of the chief concerns among Western intelligence — that now, in the wake of the US withdrawal, it is difficult if not impossible to assess the Taliban’s effectiveness in curtailing ISIS-K. With no military or diplomatic presence on the ground, and drones now having to fly many hours from distant bases to get to Afghanistan for reconnaissance, intelligence access is incredibly limited, according to US officials and analysts.

For that reason, some have disparaged the Biden administration’s “over-the-horizon” strategy — aimed at striking terrorists without American boots on the ground — as “over the rainbow.” They point to the botched US drone strike in Kabul that killed 10 civilians, including an aid worker and seven children, as an example of the pitfalls for intelligence agencies even before the complete withdrawal, and the killing of al Qaeda leader Ayman al-Zawahiri as one of the sole successes to date.

In a 2023 threat assessment report by US intelligence agencies, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence said that ISIS-K “almost certainly retains the intent to conduct operations in the West and will continue efforts to attack outside Afghanistan.”

The US has not recognized the Taliban as the government of Afghanistan. US officials are not cooperating with the Taliban to counter ISIS-K, nor does the US share any intelligence information with them, CENTCOM spokesperson Maj. John Moore told CNN. Instead, the Taliban are fighting the group — which the US estimates now numbers between 2,000 and 2,500 fighters in Afghanistan — on its own.

The uptick in violence has put the Taliban in a difficult spot. After two decades fighting their own insurgency, they are grappling with delivering security and sticking to their signature pledge under the US-Taliban Doha Agreement in 2020, to prevent any group from using Afghanistan to threaten the safety of the US and its allies.

Taliban security forces have been waging ongoing operations and night raids against ISIS-K. The raids often target civilians accused of harboring or helping ISIS-K members, with the Taliban assaulting and detaining people without due process, according to research by Human Rights Watch (HRW). In some cases, Taliban authorities have forcibly disappeared or killed detainees, dumping or displaying bodies in public areas.

“The Taliban have been going after them in ways that are actually counterproductive because they have tackled them in the same way that everyone who’s been in power in Afghanistan has tackled insurgencies, which is as brutally as possible, which means you stir up a lot of resentment in local communities, and that stirs up more recruits,” Patricia Gossman, associate director for HRW’s Asia division, said. “We documented a number of raids by the Taliban in Kunar and Nangarhar, which ended up with a lot of people being killed who may or may not have had anything to do with ISIS-K.”

The US National Security Council claimed in April that the Taliban had killed the ISIS-K leader who plotted the deadly 2021 suicide bombing at the Kabul international airport’s Abbey Gate, which was carried out amid chaotic evacuation efforts, killing 13 US service members and more than 170 Afghans who were trying to flee the country. In the days prior to the attack, the suicide bomber was among thousands of prisoners who were freed by the Taliban from Parwan detention facility at Bagram air base and Pul-e-Charkhi prison.

“In 2021, ISIS-K was reduced to a couple of cells in the country and a very tiny, small stronghold in Kunar Province, and that was it. However, in the less than stellar handover procedure, in that chaos, the Taliban opened the prisons, including Bagram, which was a big mistake … they underestimated that there were also a couple of thousand ISIS-K members, who, once freed, just walked off,” said Hans-Jakob Schindler, senior director of the Counter Extremism Project, who served as a member and then as coordinator of the UN Security Council’s ISIL, al Qaeda and Taliban Monitoring Team.

“The organization was very diligently able to reestablish itself.”

UN Secretary-General António Guterres reported in January 2022 that the number of ISIS-K recruits had doubled in less than a year, from approximately 2,200 to nearly 4,000 fighters, with up to half of them foreign terrorist fighters, according to one assessment. Their ranks were buoyed by the prison breaks, and their diverse membership has meant the Taliban risk defections by countering them, Schindler said, adding that could spur anti-Taliban factionalism. Since the group was established in 2015, ISIS-K has included a number of former Taliban, as well as Pakistani fighters, including from the Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP) which was designated as a foreign terrorist organization by the United States in 2010.

The group, operating in compartmented cells, is capitalizing on loose tactical partnerships and a large number of unaffiliated fighters, or freelance jihadists, who now have greater access than ever before to a large number of capabilities following the United States’ hurried departure, according to Javid Ahmad, a nonresident senior fellow with the Atlantic Council’s South Asia Center who is tracking ISIS-K’s activities.

“They now have unfettered access to the black market, for purchasing not just light weapons, but fertilizers for explosives, smaller commercial drones, which they can customize. They have access to sophisticated communication equipment. They are buying laser-guided sniper weapons. They have access to night vision goggles. And oftentimes when they do targeted assassinations, that’s how they do it,” said Ahmad, formerly Afghanistan’s ambassador to the United Arab Emirates, who has worked with the US defense community.

Ahmad and Schindler both say that the ISIS-K bombing at the entrance of the foreign ministry, past at least three checkpoints, reflects the group’s growing access to intelligence and its capacity to execute complex operations. And though it has not yet demonstrated its ability to carry out attacks outside of Afghanistan, it has ambitions to do so, they agree.

“We are about to repeat the same mistake that we did in the 1990s, believing that Afghanistan … has very little if anything to do with us,” Schindler said. “We took the eye off the ball and we are about to do the same thing again.”

Leaked classified documents from the Pentagon, obtained by The Washington Post in April, portray Afghanistan as a staging ground for ISIS-K, and suggest the group is a growing threat to the US, Europe and Asia. The US intelligence assessment, which was disseminated on the Discord messaging platform, revealed the group’s efforts to coordinate several external operations, targeting embassies, churches, business centers and the 2023 FIFA World Cup soccer tournament, the Post reported.

Responding to a question about the leaks, Vedant Patel, the US State Department’s deputy spokesperson, said: “The degradation of ISIS in the region continues to be a top priority for this administration and it’s something that we continue to work collectively on with our allies and partners.”

The Taliban rejected the report, with its spokesperson, Zabihullah Mujahid, saying in a statement on Twitter that the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan “has full control over the country and does not allow anyone to use Afghanistan against the security of any other country,” adding that terrorist groups like ISIS-K had been “severely affected and are in the process of being destroyed.”

Loving father exposed as a convicted killer who lived life on the run

The bare facts of the case cast American teenager William Leslie Arnold as a murderous villain who shot his parents because they refused to let him take their car to a drive-in in 1958.

Then just 16 years old, Arnold buried their bodies in the backyard of the family’s home in Omaha, Nebraska, and went about life as normal for two weeks, until he was confronted and confessed to a crime that saw him sentenced to life in prison.

From there, Arnold’s story could have followed the familiar path of a lifer – decades of incarceration before a death noted by some and mourned by few.

But Arnold’s escape from prison, while still a young man in 1967, led to a totally different outcome that ended incongruously in Australia, and the death of a man by a different name, who was known as a loving father to a family who had no idea about his secret life.

The murders

Black and white press images from the 1950s show a slight boy being led into the garden of his home, surrounded by police officers as he pointed to where he buried his parents.

Geoff Britton, chief of the Office of Law Enforcement Support in California, recalls details of the case with the vivid recollection of someone who has spent years poring over the files.

The night of the murders, Arnold shot his parents before taking the car and watching a double feature with his high school girlfriend before telling everyone – even family members – that his parents had taken a trip.

“He had killed his parents. And he was going to bury them in the yard later that night and he’s at the drive-in seeing ‘The Undead,’” said Britton, who worked on the case for nine years from 2004 to 2013 at the State of Nebraska Department of Correctional Services.

“To kill your parents over the use of the car to go to the movies – that’s not normal. It made me wonder if something else was going on,” he told CNN.

By the time Britton started on the case, Arnold had been on the run for more than three decades.

In 1967, after serving just eight years of his life sentence, Arnold and a fellow inmate, James Harding, communicated with someone on the outside, through newspaper advertisements placed in local newspaper, the Lincoln Journal Star, Britton said.

“I was able to identify the person that helped them get the equipment to get out of prison – it was a former parolee,” said Britton, explaining that the parolee obtained masks the prisoners used to fool guards who conducted daily head counts at the prison.

“Similar to the movie ‘Escape from Alcatraz’ with Clint Eastwood,” Britton added.

Newspaper reports at the time documented their daring escape over a 12-foot high wire fence in the low-security area of the prison, using a T-shirt to cover the barbed wire.

A ground and air search extended across four states with helicopters, fixed-wing aircraft, patrol troopers, sheriff’s deputies and police officers, according to an article in the Lincoln Journal Star dated July 15, 1967. Three months later, the Omaha World-Herald quoted a prison warden as saying theirs was the “cleanest” escape in his experience.

Britton said investigators later discovered the escapees made it to Omaha, then caught a bus to Chicago, where they parted ways, according to Harding, who was captured within one year.

Arnold appeared to have vanished.

Over the years, investigators followed numerous leads, including hearsay that he had fled to South America, though they found no proof that he was ever there.

Britton became so obsessed with the case, he continued investigating it even when he moved away from Nebraska – and he was later put in touch with Matthew Westover, a deputy United States Marshal in Nebraska, who told CNN he took over the file in 2020.

“One of the guys left the office, and (when you leave) you have to hand over your cases. So one of my buddies gave me this case, as kind of a joke, you know, like ‘you’re never going to find this guy,’” Westover said.

Westover read stories in the Omaha World-Herald by reporter Henry J. Cordes, who covered the case extensively in a series titled “The Mystery of Leslie Arnold.”

Through numerous interviews, Cordes found a more complicated story than some had been led to believe. In the series, he portrayed Arnold as a good student who had a difficult relationship with his parents. The shooting, wrote Cordes, came after a heated argument between Arnold and his mother, who disapproved of his girlfriend.

In prison, Arnold followed the rules and could have qualified for early release, Cordes wrote. He was a dedicated musician and the prison music room where he spent much of his time literally became his window of escape.

Along with the masks, the parolee threw hacksaws over the fence, which Arnold and Harding used to cut through the bars on the window before scaling the fence, according to Cordes.

The more Westover read, the more convinced he became that he was the man to find Arnold.

“From day one, I was hooked,” he said.

How the law closed in on Arnold

By the time the case had landed on Westover’s desk the world had changed.

Arnold may have used classified ads to arrange his escape from prison, but decades on, crimes were no longer solved by poring over old newspapers.

By 2020, DNA testing had become commonplace, so Westover got in the car and drove five hours across the border to find James Arnold, William Leslie Arnold’s young brother.

James Arnold wasn’t home when the murders were committed, but more than 60 years later he was happy to comply with a request from Westover for a DNA sample, which the US Marshal uploaded to an ancestry site. It didn’t return anything useful.

Undeterred, Westover sought out old FBI files and used Britton’s earlier research to try to piece together Arnold’s movements.

As Westover dug deeper, the DNA sample he’d uploaded in 2020 finally hit a match. In 2022, Westover received an alert that James Arnold’s DNA had matched with another sample with enough similarities to be a close relative.

“I noticed right away that I had a match that was way higher than anything I’d had before. It was basically exactly what I was looking for,” said Westover, who immediately reported the finding to Britton.

Westover said he also received an email from the man who had uploaded it. “It said, ‘Hey, I’m trying to find out more information about my father. He was an orphan from Chicago.’”

“So I pass that on to Geoff and I was like, ‘this is the guy. There’s no way this isn’t the guy.”

The man behind the email

The man that sent the email was Arnold’s son, whose identity both Westover and Britton are careful to protect.

Westover said the son didn’t know he’d emailed a US Marshal who’d been tasked with tracking down his father. Westover said the son assumed he was a family member, as he’d used James Arnolds’ name to upload the DNA.

The son said he wanted to know more about his father, who he knew as John Damon, who died in 2010.

Westover said he engaged in very cautious correspondence, so as not to potentially alert Arnold that the law was closing in – if he was, in fact, still alive.

“If he’s this smart, and he was able to elude police for 50 years, who’s to say he didn’t fake his death and all the photos?” Westover asked.

Westover said he was finally convinced that Arnold was dead when local officials confirmed a death certificate – and that’s when Westover knew he had to tell Arnold’s son the details of his father’s darkest secret.

“I felt guilty. I mean, he’s giving me all this information. And here I am holding the key to what he needed,” said Westover.

“And at the same time, I’m also kind of pressed against the clock because he’s telling me that he’s reaching out to all these other family members as well that he doesn’t know.”

Westover said he wanted to be the one to tell him about his father, and he arranged a video call with the man and his wife. “I just wanted to make sure that he wasn’t alone because, I mean, there’s a lot to take on,” he said.

Westover said he made the call from his car, as he sat in his driveway, via a cellphone propped up on the dashboard.

“I showed him who I was… then he asked me what (his father) did to be in prison. So I had to tell him,” he said. “I told him, ‘Well, he was an orphan. He didn’t lie about that, but he killed his parents, that’s why he was an orphan.’”

William Leslie Arnold – aka John Damon – died age 69 and was laid to rest in Australia, thousands of miles from the fortified walls of Nebraska State Penitentiary, where he might otherwise have ended his days.

Now that they know his alias, US officials are piecing together Arnold’s life from his last known location in Chicago.

Westover says Arnold changed his name a few months after escaping from prison in 1967. Britton says he got a job in a restaurant, where he met his first wife and became a father to her four children.

Investigators say they then moved to Cincinnati, Miami and Los Angeles before divorcing in 1978. Records show that Arnold moved to New Zealand in the 1990s, then Australia later the same decade, Westover said.

Britton said his family, including his second wife, had no knowledge of his former life.

“My heart goes out to that entire family,” he said.

Westover says in some ways, he’s relieved Arnold is dead – after meeting his family, he would not want to have sought his arrest and deportation to the United States.

Britton feels the same.

“The police officer in me always wanted to arrest him and bring him in. But you know, that wasn’t the outcome,” he said.

“But I gotta tell you, I have spoken to his family several times now. They are an incredible family. And I won’t say much about them out of privacy concerns, but what I will say is this …

“I think ultimately he became the parent who he wanted to be, or the one he wished he had.

“Because from everything I’ve noticed, it seems like he was a good provider and a good father. He raised some pretty great kids.”

Arnold’s son, who asked not to be identified to protect his family’s privacy, declined to be interviewed for this piece, but provided CNN with a statement that reads:

“There’s no warning label on the DNA test kit telling you that you might not like what you find,” he said. “But I don’t regret doing it, and I’m glad I now know the truth about my dad.

“Although it’s shocking to know that his life began with a terrible crime, his legacy is so much more than that.

“I want him to be remembered for being a good father and provider to us, and instilling in me a passion for music, and a drive to always be the best person I can be.”

American ‘stolen’ as a baby finds family in Chile

Scott Lieberman, an American who lives in San Francisco, always knew that he was adopted from Chile. What he did not know was that he had been stolen as an infant.

“I lived 42 years of my life without knowing that I was stolen, not knowing what was happening down in Chile during the 70s and 80s and I just, I want people to know… There are families out there that can still be reunited,” Lieberman said.

During the dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet (1973-90), many babies were funneled to adoption agencies. Some of the children came from rich families, taken or given up to protect reputations. Other babies from poorer backgrounds were simply stolen – as it appears was the case with Lieberman.

In the last decade, CNN has documented multiple cases of Chilean babies who were stolen at birth. Authorities in the country say priests, nuns, doctors, nurses and others conspired to carry out illegal adoptions, with the main motive being profit.

Chilean officials say the number of stolen babies could be in the thousands, but the country’s investigation into the controversial adoptions has languished over the years. Some who took part in the illegal adoptions have died. Many clinics or hospitals where the babies were allegedly stolen no longer exist.

When Lieberman found out about the scandal a few months ago, he began to wonder if the same thing had happened to him – and began to piece together the story of two families deceived, in Chile and in the United States.

Stolen children

Lieberman’s story starts in late 1979 in the town of Cañete, located in south central Chile’s Biobío region. His mother Rosa Ester Mardones, then 23 years old, had just found out she was pregnant. Since she was unmarried and in a difficult financial situation, she sought help, according to her daughter Jenny Escalona Mardones, who is two years older than Lieberman.

Escalona told CNN that Catholic nuns went to visit her mother and offered her a job in Santiago, the capital, where “she would do domestic work at a house belonging to a doctor.”

Once in Santiago, she was also helped by a social worker who, according to Escalona, seemed particularly interested in Mardones’ case. Over the course of her pregnancy, Escalona said, the social worker made her mother sign multiple documents that the young woman from the countryside didn’t fully understand.

The baby was born on August 21, 1980, at Santiago’s Clinica Providencia. He was healthy, but Rosa Ester Mardones barely got to see him after delivery. The social worker took custody and took the baby away, even before his mother had left the hospital, Escalona said.

When Mardones sought the social worker to inquire about the baby, she was threatened.

“Don’t come here looking for the baby anymore; because, if you do I will call the police, and they will arrest you,” Escalona said her mother was told.

“Your son is now in the Netherlands or Sweden. He’s in a different country. You’re a poor, single woman, and you’re not capable of raising another child. You signed your parental rights away, anyway.”

During the dictatorship, asking too many questions was risky. For a woman like Mardones, getting help from the police would’ve been unthinkable.

The baby was indeed in a different country, but not in Europe. An American couple had adopted him and done all the paperwork to legally take the baby home with them to the United States, where the infant, now named Scott Lieberman, would grow up.

‘I feel more complete’

In an interview with CNN, Lieberman, now 42 years old, said his adoptive parents never suspected they were adopting a baby boy who was stolen from his biological mother.

It was not until late last year when Lieberman, who works as a video editor, read a story about illegal adoptions in Chile, that he began to wonder if that had been his case too.

With the help of “Nos Buscamos” a Chilean nonprofit organization seeking to reunite children who were taken away from their biological parents, he found out he had a half-sister. With the help of MyHeritage, an online genealogy company, Lieberman and Escalona took DNA tests that confirmed they are related.

Lieberman showed CNN his Chilean birth certificate and birth record as well as his American adoption documents.

On April 11, Lieberman flew to Chile to meet his biological family. His mother had died of bone cancer in 2015, at the age of 58. She never knew her son was adopted by an American family and would return to his native Chile less than a decade later.

He instead met his half-sister at the Concepción Airport. She doesn’t speak English and his Spanish is basic, but there were no words needed. Despite being strangers a few weeks before, they were now hugging as if they had known each other their entire lives. No one, including those around them, had a dry eye.

Asked how he felt about returning to his native country, Lieberman said: “Very good. Almost all my family is here. It’s incredible. So much love!” Members of his extended family had also shown up and he later met with his biological father as well.

His sister, Escalona, said she felt “very happy,” yet lost for words.

Lieberman believes he was fortunate, especially when he thinks about those mothers and children who haven’t found each other.

“She knew I existed. There are other mothers who were told their children were stillborn. They don’t know that their child could still be alive in another country,” Lieberman said.

Lieberman spent 12 days in Chile, visiting his biological mother’s tomb along with his sister.

“I didn’t feel that my life wasn’t complete before. I had a lot of love from my family growing up. I have a lot of love from my friends. But now, it’s weird, but I do feel more complete. [I feel] loved in a way that I’ve never felt before,” Lieberman told CNN after returning to San Francisco from Chile.

Escalona now believes the nuns who went to visit her mother when she became pregnant, as well as the doctor in whose house she worked, conspired with the social worker to steal her half-brother from her mother.

Escalona said her mother never told her anything about her brother. She believes a combination of shame, pain and sadness prevented her mother from letting her know the truth.

“Never, ever, did my mother talk about the fact that she had had a child and that he had been stolen. It was the painful truth that she kept to herself for many years. I even think that her pain took her away,” Escalona said.

What Escalona knows is from a close relative who helped her mother. That relative was with her mother during the pregnancy and knew details about the baby’s birth and how he was taken away from her mother, Escalona said.

The truth has helped Escalona understand things about her mother that once seemed puzzling, including her mother’s decision to live near Santiago’s airport during the last years of her life.

“She liked going to the airport and she would ask us to go with her. She would just sit down and watch people, especially those who were arriving,” Escalona said.

She now believes her mother hoped her son would come back.

Her mother moved back to Cañete just before she died, but would often say: “I can no longer hear the airplanes.”

‘Murderers’ and ‘criminals’: Meteorologists face unprecedented harassment from conspiracy theorists

“Murderers.” “Criminals.” “We are watching you.”

These are just a handful of the threats and abuse sent to meteorologists at AEMET, Spain’s national weather agency, in recent months. They come via social media, its website, letters, phone calls – even in the form of graffiti sprayed across one of its buildings.

Abuse and harassment “have always happened” against the agency’s scientists, Estrella Gutiérrez-Marco, spokesperson for AEMET, told CNN.

But there has been a rapid rise recently, coinciding with extreme weather in Spain. A severe drought has shrunk water levels to alarming lows, exacerbated by record-breaking April temperatures.

The abuse got so bad that in April, AEMET posted a video on Twitter calling for an end to the harassment, and asking for respect. Even the government intervened. Teresa Ribera, Spain’s minister for the ecological transition, posted on Twitter in support of the agency: “Lying, giving wings to conspiracy and fear, insulting … It is time to say enough.”

The harassment of meteorologists by conspiracy theorists and climate deniers is not a phenomenon confined to Spain.

National weather services, meteorologists and climate communicators in countries from the US to Australia say they’re experiencing an increase in threats and abuse, often around accusations they are overstating, lying about or even controlling the weather.

In Spain’s case, much of the trolling revolves around the rehashing of an old conspiracy theory: so-called “chemtrails.”

Under many of the agency’s Twitter posts, especially those that refer to more extreme weather, users have posted images of blue skies, crisscrossed with wispy, white trails. They falsely claim the trails contain a cocktail of chemicals to artificially manipulate the weather – keeping rain away and causing climate change.

It’s a theory roundly rejected by scientists.

Airplanes do release vapor trails called contrails, short for condensation trails, which form when water vapor condenses into ice crystals around the small particles emitted by jet engines.

But scientists have been clear: There is no evidence “chemtrails” exist.

‘One of the hardest experiences’

In April, meteorologist Isabel Moreno wrote a tweet saying “rain skips Spain,” with an image of a band of rain stretching across Europe but missing Spain almost entirely. She was completely unprepared for the response.

“It was one of the hardest experiences in social media in my life,” said Moreno, who appears on the Spanish TV channel RTVE. “I received HUNDREDS of responses to an (apparently) inoffensive tweet,” she told CNN in an email.

Many accused her of covering up weather manipulation.

“Do not take us for idiots,” said one. “They dry us up, and you are the spokesperson for those who do it,” said another. And on, and on.

While there were plenty of supportive messages, too, it was scary, Moreno said. “I have never seen either that amount of responses nor that level of aggression.” It took days for her to be able to go onto Twitter again without feeling anxious or stressed.

This phenomenon may be particularly pronounced in Spain, but it spreads much wider.

In France, meteorologists have been accused of exaggerating the country’s drought and heat.

Météo France, the French national meteorological service, said the agency’s communications are “the object of more and more repeated attacks,” a Météo France spokesman told CNN.

Climate misinformation on social media is particularly widespread, he said. It “seems to be on the rise, both in terms of the number of attacks directed against scientific publications but also the increasingly aggressive tone of the insults.”

In Australia, the Bureau of Meteorology has been bombarded with criticism of its reporting of temperature records, with claims they have been inflated to make climate change seem worse. A spokeswoman for BOM called these claims inaccurate. “The Bureau transparently reports on and provides access to its very large climate data records,” she said.

And in the UK, meteorologists reported unprecedented levels of online harassment during last year’s record-breaking heat wave, which led to the first-ever “red warning” for heat.

“As scientists communicated this information, they were accused of instigating a nanny state hysteria,” Liz Bentley, the chief executive of the Royal Meteorological Society, told CNN.

The Met Office was even accused of changing the color palette of its maps to make them look more dramatic. “We hadn’t, it was just really hot,” Oliver Claydon, a communications officer at the Met Office, told CNN.

US meteorologists and climate communicators have not escaped the barrage of abuse and conspiracies.

“Whenever I posted about global topics, like the yearly temperature report, the comments section would be filled with political jabs and conspiracy theories,” said Elisa Raffa, a broadcast meteorologist with Queen City News, based in Charlotte, North Carolina.

As a woman in the media, she more often receives comments about her appearance than the science she’s communicating, she told CNN.

Jennifer Francis, a senior scientist at Woodwell Climate Research Center, said she’s seen a ramp up of abuse lately.

“I receive almost daily verbal declarations of my ignorance and climate alarmism,” she told CNN.

An erosion of trust

Some disinformation experts draw a straight line from the conspiracies that flourished during the Covid pandemic – when experts faced a slew of abuse – to the uptick in climate conspiracies.

People need “trending” topics on which to hang these theories, said Alexandre López-Borrull, a lecturer in the Information and Communication Sciences Department at Universitat Oberta de Catalunya in Spain.

As Covid-19 fades from the headlines, climate change has become a strong rallying point. There’s been a big increase in “insults directed at all organizations related to the weather,” he told CNN.

“It’s a logical evolution of the broader trend around pushback on institutions, and the erosion of trust,” said Jennie King, the head of Climate Research and Policy at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue, a think tank focused on disinformation and extremism.

These kinds of conspiracies are usually grounded in the idea that a set of institutions is “using the pretext of climate change, or the pretext of solving public policy issues, to enact some insidious agenda,” she told CNN.

And the weather is an easy way in. Many aspects of climate science can feel very technical or abstract, but the weather is something people interact with frequently, said King.

“It’s a much more immediate way to bring a wider audience into that skepticism … planting seeds of doubt against the climate agenda writ large,” she said.

The role meteorologists have in explaining how climate change affects the weather, especially extreme weather, is a particular flashpoint.

Extreme weather can be alarming, especially when there are consequences and sacrifices, such as Spain’s water restrictions.

Conspiracy theories feed on this fear by offering a simple, enticing explanation, said López-Borrull. It’s easier to believe climate change is fake, or a manipulation by powerful people, than get your head around the complex problem and what it means for society.

“Change is hard and scary,” Francis said

‘I’m just trying to do my job’

It’s difficult to combat conspiracy theories when they bubble up. Some experts say they offer simple charts and rebuttals when they can, but try to ignore those who come in bad faith.

Doug McNeall, a climate scientist and statistician at the Met Office Hadley Centre, a UK research center, said that, as a scientist, he welcomes being challenged. “If people come with better evidence, and you change your mind, that’s good,” he told CNN.

But that’s not been his recent experience. “These people were not coming with better evidence,” he said. “They were coming to stop us talking about climate science.” He now relies much more on the block button.

Moreno echoed this. “I find it very difficult to change the minds of people that really have strong beliefs in these conspiracies,” she said. It’s easier to prevent the ideas from taking hold in people in the first place by tackling the myths and explaining how the atmosphere works, she added.

This kind of communication can really help, said King. Some of the best initiatives are “when media outlets or scientific institutions really try to demystify the process of how they produce public interest data,” she said.

King worries about the impact of these conspiracies on climate politics. “If we want to implement any policies, ambitious or not, around the environmental agenda, and the acute crisis of climate change, it does now seem that this is going to rear its head,” she said.

López-Borrull hopes meteorologists and climate communicators will persevere and not be pushed away from online spaces.

“The answer is not disappearing or closing social media profiles … they have to remain on social media because they are really useful,” López-Borrull said.

But as the climate crisis causes more extreme weather, harassment could increase even further.

And it takes a toll, said Raffa.

“I think it’s easy for people to forget I’m human, some of those comments can be hurtful. I’m just trying to do my job.”

Ukraine’s air defenses are better than ever, but Dnipro devastation shows they’re not perfect

The drive takes us through unmarked roads and fresh trails in a remote wooded area.

“We’re nearly there,” our driver signals, pointing at a dot on a map, a location shared by the Ukrainian military.

We turn a corner and, in the bushes, we see the Gepard, a German-made self-propelled anti-aircraft gun.

Air defense units like this one can be the difference between life and death, whenever Russia launches missile strikes or fills the skies with swarms of Iranian-made drones.

They are frequently targeted by Moscow and this type of access is rare.

“You are looking at a Gepard 1 A2 self-propelled anti-aircraft gun,” Oleh, one of the gun’s operators says.

“The turret is equipped with two 35 mm guns made by Orlikon, the rate of fire of these guns is 550 rounds per minute per gun, which is 1,100 rounds per minute in total.”

This is one of 34 Gepards Germany has sent to Kyiv, with more already promised. The system, first built in the 1970s and decommissioned by Berlin in 2010, is old but reliable and has been a game changer for Ukraine.

“Thanks to the fact that this anti-aircraft system has a computer system that automatically helps us to detect the target, capture it and help us destroy it as soon as possible,” Oleh explains.

“There may be more than one target, maybe three or four targets, and we need to destroy them one by one, so the computer system makes it as easy as possible for the operator to do their job.”

His unit has already shot down four Shahed drones and two missiles.

“[The Russians] like to say that their missiles are impossible to shoot down, but when the technology allows, the crew is motivated, trained and knows their job, nothing is impossible,” he adds. “We can destroy any enemy target.”

Because of Western donations, Ukraine now field a multi-layered air defense network capable of hitting short, medium and long range targets.

The Gepard is the tip of the spear in an arsenal that now includes Franco-Italian SAMP/T, German Iris-T, as well as the American NASAMS and Patriot air defense systems, among others. All of these are kept under even more secrecy, in undisclosed locations away from prying eyes, to avoid targeting by Russian forces.

And the results are on display, with Russian missile and drone strikes inflicting less and less damage.

“By enriching our air defense system with such very effective models, we increase the effectiveness of the air defense system in general, in particular, we have the means that can fight Kinzhals and ballistic missiles, as well as cruise missiles and strike drones,” Lieutenant General Serhii Naiev, Commander of the Joint Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine says.

Lt General Naiev has oversight over the Gerards and says their work in combination with other systems is why Ukraine’s air defenses have become so effective.

“We place them at appropriate distances in the overall air defense concept. This gives the result that we see with our own eyes when we count the number of enemy targets shot down,” he explains.

“The percentage is constantly increasing, now the efficiency is over 80%.”

He says the current success rate has no parallel.

“This is the efficiency of our crews, these guys, and the assistance provided by our partners. We are grateful to our partners,” Naiev says. “We’ll definitely continue learning and will definitely continue to defend our land from air strikes.”

Dnipro strike

Still, some drones and missiles do break through Ukraine’s anti-aircraft defenses.

Sometimes their impact is minimal, but sometimes it is devastating, such as Friday’s deadly strike in the city of Dnipro.

“S-300 or S-400 anti-aircraft guided missiles, this is the type of weapon the occupiers often use attacking the frontline areas. Presumably, it was these types of rockets that struck civilian objects [in Dnipro],” Yurii Inhat, spokesman for Ukraine’s Air Force command said after the strike.

“Using this type of weapon in the densely populated cities is pure terrorism.”

Lt. General Naiev says to stop such attacks breaking through its defenses Ukraine needs more equipment, more ammunition and more training for its personnel.

“We realize that the protection of civilians and important critical facilities depends on the amount of equipment we have received and the training of our personnel,” Naiev says.

“In order to increase and improve the air defense system, we need more of the latest models and certainly ammunition and missiles for them, because the enemy tests our air defense system almost every night.”

“We are spending our missiles and ammunition,” he adds.

Oleh agrees. “We are very effective in doing our job, but in order to push the enemy out of our land, we certainly need more weapons,” he says.

Presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak says the Ukrainian government is trying to get its soldiers what they need, asking allies for additional weapons.

“President Zelensky, together with the leaders of other countries, has built an almost perfect system of closed skies over Ukraine, which consists of many different elements of missile defense,” he says.

“But in order for the sky to be absolutely covered, especially from guided air bombs and from ballistic missiles with a close range, which have an approach time of 1.5 minutes, we need F-16s for that.”

“Undoubtedly [our allies] will finally allow us to close the sky and then Russia will lose its last trump card – the ability to terrorize the civilian population of Ukraine using aerial attacks.”

From defense to offense

As Ukraine shifts from defense to offense, preparing to launch a much anticipated counteroffensive, air defense assets like the Gepard will also play an important part protecting advancing troops.

“[Air defense] is very important in order to protect the counteroffensive groups during their movement, also for the creation of proper offensive groups, and during the conduct of the offensive as an air cover, because the enemy will throw all available forces that he has to reduce the combat potential of our offensive,” Lt. General Naiev explains.

“Success on the ground during the advance and liberation of Ukrainian territory will depend on high-quality air defenses.”

In some cases, air defense systems can also be used for offensive purposes.

“We can destroy the Su-25, Su-35 and Su-54, which are the most promoted aircraft of our enemy,” Oleh says. “We can also work on ground targets, on armored vehicles.”

“We have additional weapons, we can use shells that can hit lightly armored and armored vehicles,” he adds.

Germany intensifies scrutiny of far-right AfD, labeling its youth wing ‘extremist’

Germany’s intelligence services already have the right to monitor the far-right Alternative for Germany party (AfD), the first time the authorities have taken such a step against a political party since the Nazi era. Now, they have taken aim at the AfD’s youth faction, whose members are as young as 14. CNN has been taking a closer look at the group.

Germany’s domestic intelligence agency, the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (BfV), in April labeled the group as “extremist” after four years of investigation.

In a statement in April, the intelligence agency deemed the AfD’s youth wing, the Young Alternative for Germany or Junge Alternative für Deutschland (JA), as “clearly xenophobic” and “propagating a racial concept of society based on basic biological assumptions.” It deemed the group was likely to adopt “non-peaceful behavior” towards people perceived as foreign.

The move, which doesn’t apply to parent party AfD, is as far as the state can go aside from an outright ban. German authorities are now able to monitor and intercept JA mail correspondence, phone calls and online conversations. It can also limit members’ ability to get employment in the public sector and make it more difficult to obtain licenses for weapons.

The party has rejected the labeling. “I am not an extremist, on the contrary – I have put my life on the line for Germany in Afghanistan,” Hannes Gnauck, AfD Member of Parliament and the JA’s federal chairman, told CNN.

“I would not have done that if I did not believe in democracy and the free democratic order.”

The JA was founded in the same year as its parent party in 2013. However, it remains legally independent from that party and is often seen as its more hard-line faction.

Open to young people aged between 14-35, much of the JA’s campaigning pedals an openly anti-migrant, euroskeptic and anti-feminist agenda. The JA’s Facebook page, for example, calls feminism a “left-wing ideology” and calls on users to post reasons to reject it.

It believes the EU’s political powers should be curbed, with former chairman Philipp Ritz once describing the organization as a “train” that is “constantly accepting new passengers without knowing where it’s actually heading.”

According to the BfV, the JA promotes an ethno-nationalist worldview that ostracizes anyone who is not a native, white German.

In 2019, BfV President Thomas Haldenwang said members showed “clear evidence of an anti-immigration and particularly anti-Muslim attitude,” which is contrary to Germany’s democratic principles.

Last October, the JA elected Gnauck as its federal chairman. He had previously served in Germany’s army for seven years, including several months in Afghanistan in 2019-2020.

Speaking to CNN in the wake of his party’s “extremist” designation, Gnauck described himself as a “soldier with every ounce of his heart.”

The AfD shot to prominence in 2016 following ex-Chancellor Angela Merkel’s decision – one that attracted both praise and criticism – to allow in hundreds of thousands of refugees fleeing war in Syria and beyond. Polling suggests the AfD’s stance on migrants remains an issue that resonates with voters.

Gnauck says he remembers a different Germany in the 1990s, when it was “possible to leave your door open in the village, but that doesn’t happen anymore.”

He blames immigration for the perception that Germans feel less safe in their homes – even though there is no evidence to link increased immigration to higher crime.

“In the past,” said Gnauck, explaining how he sees the party’s appeal, “the one who rebelled against the teachers, the one who rebelled against his or her own parents – was more like the cool punk.

“Today the cool person is a young conservative man [or] woman who just wants a normal job, a normal life, maybe one or two children, a home – so just a simple normal life.”

Gnauck said the group’s designation as extremist was not a surprise. “We have been expecting it,” adding that he believed it was a “political maneuver.”

State chairman of the AfD’s youth wing in Saxony, Alexander Wiesner, was more forceful, drawing comparisons between Germany’s domestic intelligence agency and the Stasi secret police in communist East Germany, known as the GDR.

“Other countries do not have this political secret service. It is a German tradition that should be abolished,” he told CNN. “People in Saxony belong to the former occupied zone and the GDR – people had a lot of experience here with the Stasi.”

“People have their eyes open. They read with an open mind, they say it’s the same thing that happened here in GDR times and we don’t believe this institution.”

CNN has contacted the BfV for comment. The agency describes itself as working to “ensure the protection of the free democratic basic order” and making an “important contribution” to uphold Germany’s “fundamental constitutional values.”

‘Intellectual arsonists’

But Johannes Kiess, a sociologist specializing in right-wing extremism at the Univeristy of Leipzig in eastern Germany, says the new labeling is not only justified, but long overdue.

“The youth wing of the AfD is in my view an extremist and anti-democratic organization,” he told CNN.

He believes the JA is more extreme than its sister party “because we have many individuals in the youth wing with clear links to neo-Nazis,” which he says is evident from the opinions expressed in public and in conversations on social media.

Germany’s Interior Minister Nancy Faeser has also condemned the JA, accusing it of spreading “nothing but hatred and exclusion.” She described members as “intellectual arsonists” whose danger “nobody should underestimate.”

The group’s anti-migrant ideology is clear in an advert for the party posted on Facebook in March. The post states: “Germans are now right at the bottom of the hierarchy of victims in our society.”

Gnauck denied that his party has any links to Germany’s far-right, adding that it rejects violence.

“We know that there are no right-wing extremists in the JA. We also do not have people in the JA who want to overthrow the state or rebuild it.

“Of course, we want to change this country and we want to change it democratically through elections and not through violence. This is what distinguishes us from real extremists.”

The authorities’ move against the JA comes amid a broader crackdown against the far-right in Germany. Two other organizations – the Institute for State Policy (IfS) and the “Ein Prozent” (One Percent) association – were labeled extremist at the same time as the group.

Germany last year said it had foiled an attempt by another far-right group – the Reichsbuerger movement - to plot accused of plotting an attack on Germany’s parliament building, allegedly to overthrow its constitutional order and install the group’s central figure – aristocrat Heinrich XIII Prince Reuss – as leader. The prince has not publicly commented on his arrest.

Popularity among voters

Gnauck says that his party, along with the AfD, is rising in popularity among voters in Germany.

“We see our party rising in the polls again. We are polling at 16%,” he claimed.

At Germany’s last federal election in 2021, the AfD received just over 10% of the vote – down from 12.6% four years prior.

The AfD holds the status of Germany’s most successful far-right party since World War II. The party has attracted voters angry over rising energy prices in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

But Kiess points to concerns over migration in Germany as the main reason for its recent strong polling. “The migration debate has sprung up again here in Germany – particularly because the federal government was in conflict with the state over financial issues and how to accommodate refugees.

“We always see the AfD winning from this kind of not very constructive public discussion.”

Public debate over migration has been kickstarted in light of the war in Ukraine. Since the outbreak of the conflict, more than 1 million refugees have arrived in Germany, in addition to the more than 200,000 asylum-seekers arriving from other countries.

For Germany and its government, migration has become a challenge – yet again. Several cities and municipalities in Germany say they have reached their limits, and local authorities are finding it difficult to provide for the new arrivals.

And Germans are now, too, are starting to find the influx of refugees an issue. An ARD-DeutschlandTrend poll conducted on May 5 found that half of German citizens would like the country to take in fewer refugees than it currently does.

Kiess believes that, in fact, the AfD does not want to stop migration, but rather continue to benefit from the polarized discourse around it.

“For the AfD it would be a bad thing if we had no longer had migration anymore. They would not have a topic then to gain attention with.”

As for the JA, there is no specific data to show whether the organization is rising in popularity or not. Gnauck says that since the group’s latest classification, there have been a few resignations from hunters and officers who are afraid of losing their weapons license, and those who work in the public sector, for example police officers or soldiers, who are concerned for their jobs.

However, he claims: “We also had a lot of new applications from young people. It is not that we have lost masses of members. On the contrary, we have even gained new ones.”

The coronation may have passed off peacefully. But Eurovision could be a bigger headache

Britain’s security services are quietly relieved that the coronation of King Charles III passed without major incident – save for some accusations of heavy-handed policing. But a second big event this month is causing them a bigger headache.

On the face of it, the stakes associated with the grand final of the Eurovision Song Contest would not appear to be particularly high. But this year’s contest is being staged in the English city of Liverpool because the winner of last year’s contest and the rightful host nation, Ukraine, is fighting off an unprovoked invasion from its bigger neighbor, Russia. For that reason, British security officials are more exercised than they might otherwise have been about a kitschy musical competition.

A senior British security source laid it out plainly to CNN: “Our principal concern was never the coronation, but Eurovision.”

A unique combination of factors make the contest a prime target for hostile actors. “On one hand you have thousands of people enjoying the nightlife, which means potential of physical targets and organized crime. On the other, you have a contest that is highly political at the best of times, but especially so in the context of the war in Ukraine,” the security source says.

The main concern is to protect those attending the event from physical threats, though there is no credible intelligence that the event might be victim to a terror attack, according to the Merseyside Police, who are responsible for the event.

What security sources and analysts believe is more likely, however, is an attempt by Russia to disrupt the contest in other ways, embarrassing Britain and delivering a poke in the eye to Ukraine.

Why would Russia want to disrupt a singing contest?

Russia takes Eurovision very seriously. Even before it invaded Ukraine, Moscow saw Eurovision as a window through which it could frame its culture war with Western Europe and its perceived liberal values.

Its foreign secretary, Sergei Lavrov, complained in 2013 about “stolen” votes. St. Petersburg legislator Vitaly Milonov, an influential member of Vladimir Putin’s party, called the contest “blatant propaganda of homosexuality and spiritual decay” in 2014.

Last year Russia was banned from participating due to its invasion of Ukraine, which went on to win the contest on a wave of public solidarity. Britain came second, which is why it was selected to host on behalf of Ukraine.

Eurovision provides Russia with multiple opportunities to cause havoc and disruption.

First there’s the contest itself. Voting is conducted digitally, which means it could be vulnerable to cyber attacks and Russian actors casting false votes, the security source said.

Then there’s the broadcast itself. Eurovision is watched by millions all over the world, which makes it an ideal target for anyone wanting to make a splash, says Iain Wyke, Chief Inspector of Protective Security Operations at Merseyside Police. “This is a really, really good platform. If you were a single-issue group or you had a particular ideology or particular beef you wanted to have with someone or a government, what better stage to put forward your argument, display banners and such? You’ve got the eyes of the world well and truly looking around you.”

Disruptions to the broadcast could come in other forms. Cyber attacks or attempts to interfere with the feed could lead to hijacking of the broadcast or blackouts, officials explained. There are also concerns that infrastructure around the contest – venues or social media feeds – could be targeted digitally, to cause disruption or spread disinformation.

If any protest does take place, it might not be directly related to Russia or Ukraine, but more an effort to embarrass the UK and undermine Western values that Russia opposes.

Peter Ricketts, a former National Security Adviser to the UK government, told CNN that he could imagine incidents supported or encouraged by Russian actors that are “anti-LGBT rights or held by far-right groups in the UK,” undermining the idea of Britain as a liberal state and stoking up discord and division on cultural issues.

However, top of Ricketts’ list of concerns is a cyber threat, such as “taking over the broadcast, causing blackouts or something else to disrupt proceedings, which everyone would know came from Russia but which it might be hard to attribute quickly.”

Why would this help Russia?

This year’s event is, at its heart, a partnership between the UK and Ukraine, two major thorns in the Kremlin’s side. Security officials are very aware of this context and how much Russia would like to embarrass them both.

“This is UK PLC in the spotlight, putting its best foot forward and showing how we can deliver this event for Ukraine, on their behalf with a Ukrainian style,” says Wyke. “It’s the largest non-sporting event televised … if that’s not a captive audience I don’t know what is.”

It’s also crucial to understand how Russia uses things like cyberattacks and propaganda against its perceived enemies.

“Russia has a zero-sum view of security, so anything that hurts the West is seen as a Russian gain,” says Keir Giles, a senior consulting fellow at Chatham House. “Take the anti-vaccine propaganda they pushed out both before and during the pandemic. That probably hurt Russian citizens too, but if it hurts the West, it outweighs the risk.”

Giles also notes that while the risk of a physical terrorist act is low, it cannot be fully discounted: “It is an anomaly that Russia isn’t known to be funding and supporting terror groups to cause death and destruction in European capitals at the moment. It is a cheap and effective way for Russia to cause harm. A high-profile event like this, with ties to both Britain and Ukraine, would be an obviously tempting target.”

Of course, a physical attack is the priority, even though Wyke says “no specific intelligence in relation to this event suggest any form of terror threat.”

But the influx of people to a major city gathering in venues and standing in large queues are exactly the sort of soft targets terrorists have tended to hit.

Merseyside Police will deploy 5,500 officers across Liverpool in the runup to Saturday’s final. There will be visible counter-terror measures in place like armed officers and security fences. But Wykes also notes that one of the best ways to keep this event secure is creating awareness in the local community: “A couple of weeks ago, we launched the vigilance campaign that was to bring the community into the policing operation, and ultimately, the public are our eyes and ears. And what better way than to reinforce a security regime around an event of this nature?”

It might seem odd to those unfamiliar that a singing competition created to promote peace in Europe after World War II could become such a flashpoint. But Russia’s decades-long focus on asymmetric, warfare has made an international television event with millions watching at home and in person the perfect battleground for Russia’s fight against the enemies it is unwilling – or unable – to physically invade.

Texas House of Representatives votes to impeach Attorney General Ken Paxton

The Texas House of Representatives has voted to impeach Attorney General Ken Paxton, an unprecedented move following a legislative probe that faulted the third-term Republican for a yearslong pattern of corruption, including abusing his office’s powers, retaliating against whistleblowers and obstructing justice.

Under state law, Paxton is now temporarily suspended from his duties as attorney general and will await a Senate trial.

The vote was 121-23, with two members voting “present.”

“The evidence is substantial. It is alarming and unnerving,” said GOP Rep. Andrew Murr, chair of the General Investigating Committee, during his closing statement following hours of debate. The committee recommended 20 counts of impeachment against Paxton.

Democrat Rep. Harold Dutton was one of the members voting present. He said the impeachment vote had been rushed. “The process by which we’re getting this done seems to be abbreviated to the point that it just encroaches on due process,” said Dutton.

Paxton denied wrongdoing in a Friday news conference, but focused his statements against the impeachment this week on his record as a key opponent of President Joe Biden. Paxton’s office has filed dozens of lawsuits against the Biden administration.

The now-suspended attorney general called the impeachment a “politically motivated sham” in a statement just minutes after the vote.

“The ugly spectacle in the Texas House today confirmed the outrageous impeachment plot against me was never meant to be fair or just,” he said.

Paxton said he was never given a chance to present evidence refuting the findings of an investigation that he abused his office. He has cast House Speaker Dade Phelan, a Republican who presides over a chamber where his party currently holds 85 seats to Democrats’ 64, as a “liberal.” He continued his attack on Phelan saying, “Phelan’s coalition of Democrats and liberal Republicans is now in lockstep with the Biden Administration, the abortion industry, anti-gun zealots, and woke corporations.”

The Office of the Attorney General issued its own “comprehensive report” about the allegations following the impeachment vote, saying it “unequivocally refutes incorrect testimony” against Paxton. The office also released a report it commissioned from an outside law firm, although the report from Lewis Brisbois Bisgaard and Smith LLP notes it is based only on information and testimony provided by the attorney general’s office.

Republican Governor Greg Abbott can appoint a provisional replacement while Paxton is temporarily suspended. Paxton would be reinstated if he is acquitted at his Senate trial.

The impeachment vote had its origins in an investigation launched in March by the General Investigating Committee of the Texas House after Paxton had asked the legislature to approve $3.3 million in government funds to settle a lawsuit with four whistleblowers who were fired from his office.

That investigation led the committee – a five-member panel investigating corruption in state government – to approve 20 articles of impeachment Thursday, setting up the vote in the full House.

During the debate Saturday, Rep. Charlie Geren, who is a Republican, claimed Paxton had threatened fellow House members.

“I would like to point out that several members of this House, while on the floor of this House doing the state’s business, received telephone calls from General Paxton personally threatening them with political consequences in their next election,” Geren said.

Opponents of the impeachment largely declined to address the allegations against him, instead focusing on the investigation leading up to the proceedings. “I don’t think today is about whether there’s guilt or innocence. It’s about the process,” said Rep. Tony Tinderholt.

“I’m not here to defend Ken Paxton,” Rep. John T. Smithee stated on the floor. He went on to say, “What you’re being asked to do today is to impeach without evidence. It is all rumor. It is all innuendo. It is all speculation.”

Paxton’s impeachment is a stunning rebuke of a Republican official in a state where the GOP controls all levers of state government. Voters in Texas shrugged off the swirling scandals around Paxton last year, handing him a third term in November’s election. Paxton had earlier fought off multiple opponents for the GOP nomination, including Bush family scion George P. Bush, the state land commissioner, whom he easily bested in a runoff.

Paxton has long been a controversial figure who has clashed with Texas legislative leadership. A conservative who has aligned himself with former President Donald Trump, he led a lawsuit in 2020 seeking to overturn Joe Biden’s victory in the presidential election.

He retains support within the Texas GOP. In a statement Friday, state party chairman Matt Rinaldi blasted Phelan for what he called a “sham impeachment.”

“The voters have supported General Paxton through three elections – and his popularity has only grown despite millions of dollars spent to try to defeat him. Now the Texas House is trying to overturn the election results,” Rinaldi said, adding that he was looking to the “principled leadership” of the Senate to “restore sanity and reason for our state.”

In Texas, no attorney general has ever been impeached and removed from office. The only two elected officials to lose office as a result of impeachment were Gov. James Ferguson in 1917 and District Judge O.P. Carrillo in 1975.

For Paxton to be removed from office, two-thirds of the Texas Senate’s members who are present will have to vote to convict him. His wife, Angela Paxton, is a state senator representing a Dallas-area district.

It’s not yet clear when the Senate, where Republicans have a 19-12 majority over Democrats, will conduct its trial. The state’s legislative session is scheduled to end Monday.

While only the governor can call special sessions once the legislature is out of the biennial regular session, the Texas Constitution states that impeachment is the one issue for which the state House and Senate lawmakers can bring themselves into session without the governor, according to Mark Jones, a political science professor at Rice University.

Litany of legal trouble

The impeachment proceedings are the latest in a series of legal troubles for Paxton.

CNN has previously reported he was facing an FBI investigation for abuse of office and that Justice Department prosecutors in Washington, DC, took over a corruption investigation into Paxton. He is also under indictment for securities fraud in a separate, unrelated case. Paxton has denied all charges and allegations.

The state House probe came after Paxton had sought to settle a lawsuit with four former employees of the attorney general’s office. Whistleblowers had accused him of using his authority to benefit political friend Nate Paul, a real estate investor who had donated tens of thousands of dollars to Paxton’s campaign. In the settlement, Paxton apologized but did not admit fault or accept liability. He denied wrongdoing and said in a statement he had agreed to the settlement “to put this issue to rest.”

One of the impeachment articles accuses Paxton of using employees of the attorney general’s office to write a legal opinion intended to help Paul avoid the foreclosure sale of properties owned by Paul and his businesses.

It was among a series of articles focused on Paxton’s relationship with Paul, including accusations he hired an outside attorney who issued more than 30 grand jury subpoenas while investigating a “baseless complaint” made by Paul, benefited from Paul hiring a woman with whom Paxton “was having an extramarital affair,” and provided Paul with favorable legal help in exchange for renovations on Paxton’s home.

The articles of impeachment also detail what are described as Paxton’s efforts to cause “protracted” delays in the securities fraud investigation.

And the articles say voters in November did not have a full understanding of Paxton’s legal troubles because he had intentionally obscured the details of the charges he faces.

“Paxton then concealed the facts underlying his criminal charges from voters by causing protracted delay of the trial, which deprived the electorate of its opportunity to make an informed decision when voting for attorney general,” the impeachment articles state.

A wild week

The impeachment of Paxton follows a wild week in which the attorney general accused House Speaker Phelan of presiding over the House chamber while drunk and called for the speaker’s resignation.

On Tuesday, Paxton posted on Twitter a letter to the state House ethics panel, asking for an investigation into Phelan for performing his duties in what Paxton described as “an obviously intoxicated state.”

Paxton’s call for Phelan’s resignation came after video circulated on social media last weekend of Phelan appearing to slur his words as he presided over the House chamber at the end of a late-night session. Paxton did not present any evidence beyond the video clips to support his claim Phelan was drunk.

“It is with profound disappointment that I call on Speaker Dade Phelan to resign at the end of this legislative session,” Paxton said in a statement he posted on Twitter. “Texans were dismayed to witness his performance presiding over the Texas House in a state of apparent debilitating intoxication.”

Less than an hour later, the state House General Investigating Committee revealed it had subpoenaed records from Paxton’s office as part of an investigation Phelan’s office said had started in March. The committee, whose members are appointed by Phelan, voted unanimously Thursday to recommend Paxton’s impeachment.

Phelan’s office said Paxton’s allegation was merely retaliation for the House ethics panel’s probe.

“Mr. Paxton’s statement today amounts to little more than a last-ditch effort to save face,” Phelan communications director Cait Wittman said in a statement Tuesday.

Democratic Rep. Terry Canales said the broader context of last week’s all-day session made clear Phelan “was not under the influence.”

“At that point in the night the House had been in session over 13 hours and we had been doing so for multiple days in a row. We were all exhausted,” Canales said in a statement. “Nevertheless, I had multiple interactions with the speaker throughout the day and that night and I can say unequivocally he was not under the influence.”

White House and House Republicans strike agreement in principle to raise debt ceiling

The White House and House Republicans have an agreement in principle on a deal to raise the debt ceiling for two years and cap spending, House Speaker Kevin McCarthy confirmed Saturday, moving the nation one step back from the brink of a historic default.

The agreement in principle was reached by President Joe Biden and McCarthy during a phone call Saturday, a source familiar with their call said. Now both leaders face the tall task of selling the deal to their allies in both chambers of Congress, where Republicans control the House and Democrats control the Senate. The deal must get passed before June 5 – the crucial date when Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen says the US will no longer be able to pay its bills.

“After weeks of negotiations, we have come to an agreement in principle. We still have a lot of work to do but I believe this is an agreement in principle that is worthy of the American people,” McCarthy said during a brief remarks to reporters.

“The agreement protects my and congressional Democrats’ key priorities and legislative accomplishments,” Biden said in a statement. “The agreement represents a compromise, which means not everyone gets what they want. That’s the responsibility of governing.”

If the deal ends up passing through Congress and being signed into law by Biden before that so-called X date, the White House and House Republicans will have avoided an unprecedented economic crisis. A default by the US government, which has never happened, could spark a global recession and the loss of millions of jobs – a scenario that loomed over a last-minute rush of holiday weekend negotiations.

The two-year deal would also push the next fight over raising the debt ceiling until after the 2024 elections.

House GOP leaders briefed all members on the state of negotiations later in the evening, according to multiple sources familiar with the situation, and the text of the deal will be reviewed overnight by both sides to ensure it lines up with the tentative agreement. The White House plans to brief Democrats on Sunday, according to a Democratic aide.

Despite the deal in principle, new issues could easily crop up at each step along the way, and each step has the potential to be time-consuming, running out the clock ahead of the debt limit deadline early next month. Stiff opposition is expected from both the left and right. That means it’s going to require an intense whipping operation – and support from both sides of the aisle – to get the bill over the finish line.

McCarthy heard some immediate complaints from the most conservative members of his party. Rep. Bob Good, a member of the House Freedom Caucus, expressed his objections to the deal during the House GOP call on Saturday night. He said he was disappointed in the deal and that they are raising the debt limit by more than the US would save under the plan, according to three sources on call. McCarthy detailed what he argued were the positive parts of the deal and asked him to come in and talk about it.

Rep. Scott Perry of Pennsylvania, the leader of the House Freedom Caucus, raised concerns on the call as well, but other conservatives sounded more upbeat – like Rep. Jim Jordan of Ohio, one of the sources said.

Key parts of the deal

The agreement in principle will lift the debt limit for two years and roughly cap non-defense spending to current fiscal year levels for 2024 and increase it by 1% in fiscal year 2025, according to a source familiar with the negotiations.

As part of the deal, the White House has also appeared to have made concessions to House Republican negotiators on work requirements for people receiving food stamps.

The agreement reached on Saturday phases in food stamp time limits on people up to age 54 that will then sunset in 2030, while also exempting veterans and people who are homeless from these limits, according to this source. The current work requirement for the program, formally called the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program or SNAP, only applies to certain adults between the ages 18-49.

The agreement does not make any changes to Medicaid and prevented certain changes to the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program called for by Republicans, according to this person.

A source with knowledge of the negotiations told CNN earlier Saturday that a provision to impose new work requirements for certain social safety net programs had remained a final sticking point. Republicans had been pushing the issue hard, saying beneficiaries of programs, such as food stamps, who do not have dependents should be forced to follow new rules. Democrats, however, had cast that idea as an attack on poor people.

McCarthy told reporters Saturday evening that he expects the House to vote Wednesday on the agreement reached with the White House. McCarthy said negotiators will continue working Saturday night to write the legislative text and that he expects to speak with Biden again on Sunday afternoon before the final legislative text is posted Sunday.

House Republicans circulated a fact sheet of the details of the debt limit agreement to House and Senate Republicans Saturday night after announcing the deal, according to two sources with direct knowledge of the document.

The fact sheet says the agreement will cut spending year over year and set a 1% top line number for the next six years at one percent growth. It also includes SNAP and TANF work requirements.

The bill would include an administrative pay-as-you-go provision to require that Biden finds offsets for rules and regulations that increase federal spending. It would slash the fiscal year 2023 funding request for new IRS agents, and claw back tens of billions in unspent funds meant to combat the Covid-19 pandemic.

Default looms

The pressure on negotiators is intense as the US steadily inches closer to the possibility of a default and the threat of economic catastrophe.

In a major development Friday that will give lawmakers more time to reach and pass a deal, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said that Congress must address the debt ceiling by June 5 or the government will not have enough funds to pay all of the nation’s obligations in full and on time. Previously, Yellen had estimated that the earliest possible date a default could occur was June 1.

McHenry said the Yellen’s new date “clarifies that our timeline is very tight.”

“House Republicans asked for clarification. Chip Roy and Matt Gaetz and Byron Donalds and Dan Bishop, among others, asked for clarification on Secretary Yellen’s math. She updated her math. Obviously, it was a good request. And I think it clarifies our window for us to actually achieve the deal,” he said Saturday.

Debt limit predictions, however, aren’t clear-cut. Rather than a set-in-stone deadline, it is more of a best-guess estimate, which makes it harder to know exactly how much time Congress has to act to avert potential financial catastrophe.

McCarthy and Schumer optimistic about the state of debt talks

Two days after his second recent meeting in the Oval Office to discuss raising the debt ceiling, House Speaker Kevin McCarthy sounded positive about the direction of debt limit talks, telling CNN he sees how they can get to a deal and that he wants a bill on the floor next week.

After Tuesday’s meeting with President Joe Biden, Vice President Kamala Harris and congressional leaders from both parties, McCarthy and the president agreed to more direct talks between their two teams. Those direct talks, McCarthy said, have made a positive difference.

The speaker said he’s spoken to Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer about the timing in the House and Senate to pass a bill to avert default, saying it would take four days in the House and seven in the Senate.

“We’re not there … but I see the path,” McCarthy told CNN’s Manu Raju on Thursday, adding that it would be “important” to have an agreement “by sometime this weekend.”

Asked if that was possible, McCarthy responded, “We are not there, we haven’t agreed to anything yet but I see the path that we can come to an agreement. We have a structure now.”

“I just believe where we were a week ago and where we are today is a much better place because we’ve got the right people in the room discussing it in a very professional manner with all the knowledge and all the background from all the different leaders and what they want,” McCarthy added.

McCarthy also praised the White House negotiators, Office of Management and Budget Director Shalanda Young and top White House aide Steve Ricchetti. Negotiators for each team have been meeting daily since Tuesday’s meeting. They met for more than two hours at the Capitol on Thursday.

After the meeting, North Carolia GOP Rep. Patrick McHenry told reporters that conversations have been productive, but “we’ve got a lot more work to do. Nothing is close to being done.”

“But the right things are being discussed … with the right people in the room to get this to the point where the principals can meet and have some agreement,” McHenry added.

On the Senate floor on Thursday, Schumer also seemed optimistic about the debt negotiations. And in a further sign that talks may be progressing, he announced that the Senate will keep its week-long recess – which was in danger of being canceled before talks seemed to take a more positive turn.

“I am hopeful that soon both sides will find an agreement that keeps default completely off the table. We made good progress this week. But the work continues,” Schumer said in his opening remarks ahead of the recess, underscoring that there must be a bipartisan agreement.

“I’m also pleased that the other side has recognized the best way forward is a bipartisan piece of legislation that can secure enough votes to get through both the House and the Senate. Partisan legislation just won’t produce the result we need,” he added.

While talks appear to be progressing between congressional leadership and the White House, many members of Congress remain divided over whether concessions should even be on the table.

As talks were at a standstill over the last three months, Biden insisted negotiations for the budget be detached from conversations to raise the debt ceiling and avoid default. Democrats argue that Republicans are unfairly using the nation’s credit as leverage in order to attain their proposed budget cuts.

Several Democrats have specifically expressed concerns about Republicans’ proposed enhancement of work requirements for social safety net programs, with some leading Democrats suggesting the inclusion of the requirements is a red line in negotiations. Biden has said he would not put consequential work requirements on the table for negotiations.

On the other side of the aisle, the House Freedom Caucus – a band of roughly 40 hardline conservatives – adopted an official position in the debt ceiling negotiations on Thursday, calling on McCarthy to reject anything less than the House GOP’s debt ceiling proposal.

Their position is a sign of the challenges McCarthy will face in selling any White House-negotiated deal to his right flank, even as GOP leaders have tried to temper expectations internally and frame the House-passed bill as just an opening offer.

Invoking the 14th Amendment

Democrats are divided over whether the president should invoke the 14th Amendment to allow Treasury to borrow above the debt ceiling to pay the nation’s obligations.

Were Biden to invoke the 14th Amendment in this regard, it would almost certainly prompt a constitutional crisis and swift legal action.

While the president has said he doesn’t think invoking the 14th Amendment would solve the current problem, he has said he is exploring whether it could be used in the future.

“I’ll be very blunt with you, when we get by this, I’m thinking about taking a look at, months down the road, as to see whether what the court would say about whether or not it does work,” Biden said last week.

Progressives are warning Biden not to cave to McCarthy demands on debt ceiling and urging him to consider using the untested legal theory to unilateral avoid the nation’s first-ever debt default.

Ten Democratic senators, along with Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, issued a letter to the president on Thursday calling on him to invoke the 14th Amendment.

“We write to urgently request that you prepare to exercise your authority under the 14th Amendment of the Constitution, which clearly states: ‘the validity of the public debt of the United States … shall not be questioned,’” the letter says. “Using this authority would allow the United States to continue to pay its bills on-time, without delay, preventing a global economic catastrophe.”

Rep. Jamie Raskin, the Maryland Democrat, said that Biden is required to follow the 14th Amendment to ensure all debts are paid for if there’s no deal on a debt limit.

“He needs to respect the 14th Amendment in the (way the) whole country does,” Raskin said. “Congress has to as well. I’m calling on my Republican colleagues to pull back from this very dangerous political game they’re playing. No Congress has ever brought the country to the point of a default like this.”

Sanders told reporters on Thursday that he has spoken to the White House about the potential use of the 14th Amendment, but said that it was a “private conversation” and did not elaborate.

Several senators from both parties have expressed concerns over the proposed move to invoke the 14th Amendment.

Senate Majority Whip Dick Durbin warned that 14th Amendment talks may throw a wrench in negotiations.

“As far as the long-term issue on the 14th Amendment, I think it’s a legitimate constitutional question, but inserting it into the process now tosses this into the courts and God knows when it ends,” Durbin said.

GOP Sen. John Cornyn of Texas, called the potential use of the 14th Amendment to avoid the debt ceiling “ridiculous.”

“It’s just a way to avoid responsibility. I mean, unfortunately, that happens a lot around here. There’s we need to hold people accountable for doing their jobs,” Cornyn said Thursday.

“I think that we need to rethink its requirements of our job,” Sen. Richard Blumenthal, a Connecticut Democrat, told reporters when asked about the potential use of the 14th Amendment.

Harris warns about the consequences of default

Biden departed Washington on Wednesday for a G7 meeting in Japan, announcing before his trip that he would be postponing two legs of his trip – to Papua New Guinea and Australia – in order to return to the US on Sunday for debt negotiations.

The president told reporters he would “be in constant contact with my team while I’m at the G7 and (I will) be in close contact with (House Speaker Kevin) McCarthy and other leaders as well,” during his travel abroad.

While Biden was away from the White House, Harris led a call on Thursday to warn about the consequences of a default, saying it “could trigger a recession, stop military paychecks and raise interest rates for years to come.”

“All of this is obviously unacceptable. … We believe it is absolutely unnecessary,” Harris said. “This does not have to be a crisis, our position is clear and simple: Congress must act to prevent default. … America must pay our bills, just like you and your family and other hardworking Americans do every single day.”

The vice president blasted congressional Republicans for what she said was threatening to hold the nation’s debt hostage over calls to reduce the deficit.

“Let’s be clear for Republicans in Congress. This issue is not really about lowering our nation’s debt, because if they really cared about lowering our debt, they would not they would not also fight to protect trillions of dollars in Trump tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans and the biggest corporations,” she said.

Harris faces critical test on migration effort when Title 42 ends

As President Joe Biden’s approach to migration at the US-Mexico border confronts its most critical test yet when Title 42 expires, his No. 2, Kamala Harris, will face what’s likely to be her own perception problem.

Aides of the vice president know the expiration of the Trump-era border restriction that allowed authorities to quickly expel migrants on public health grounds will bring with it a deluge of attacks against Harris, who leads the administration’s effort to address the root cause of migration in Central America.

It’s a 2-year-old task, assigned by Biden, that’s placed Harris at the apex of political vulnerability, with Republicans’ consistently framing her as the “border czar,” who has not quelled the historic surge of migration in the Western Hemisphere.

But Harris’ staff and allies counter that the real work she and her office are doing in the Northern Triangle countries – and not the border – is making a difference.

“While Republicans are focusing on these border attacks, we are doing the work of governing,” an administration official told CNN. “Each agency is slowly and steadily making progress on implementing what we laid out we’re trying to do there.”

Though Harris has rejected GOP framing that she’s responsible for border policy, she’s struggled to change the narrative. And flare ups at the border will come almost a month after Biden and Harris launched their 2024 reelection bid, testing voters opinions on this emotionally charged issue.

“Perception is a big part of politics,” said Andrew Selee, president of the non-partisan think tank Migration Policy Institute, who met with the vice president in 2021. “It matters for the vice president what happens over the next few weeks and the next few months.”

Migration from Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador to the US has reached notable lows since its height in 2021, while migrants from other countries like Venezuela, Cuba, Haiti and Nicaragua have increased dramatically.

Border arrests are often cited in assessing an administration’s handling of the US-Mexico border, even if they are not the most apt metric, experts say. White House officials are keenly aware of that and watching closely to see if the number of migrants from Central America tick back up in the coming days and weeks, the administration official said.

Publicly, the vice president’s office has called the current downward trend “encouraging,” and privately, aides cite investments in the region under Harris’ guidance as one of many factors for the drop.

So far, the vice president has secured more than $4.2 billion in private sector commitments from companies as a fundamental part of her plan to incentivize would-be migrants to stay home. Around 47 entities are collaborating across financial services, textiles and apparel, agriculture, technology, telecommunications, and nonprofit sectors to bolster the region’s economy, according to a White House fact sheet from February, the last major public update.

Diplomatically, Harris has visited Guatemala and Honduras. She’s held in-person and on the phone conversations with those counterparts but affronts to democracy and corruption concerns have limited Harris’ ability to fully engage, officials say.

Harris’ public events to tout the progress made in the region have waned in the last year with her attention turned to other domestic crises like reproductive rights, voting rights and shoring up democracy. Still, those close to the Harris say she is routinely involved.

“She’s engaged. She knows the content. She’s driving the team forward as an executive should. She gives us direction in a clear manner,” Jonathan Fantini-Porter, executive director and CEO of Partnership for Central America, which acts as a liaison between companies and the US government and regularly engages with the vice president’s office. “You can have a very in-depth conversation with her. She’s able to talk about metrics, direction of where things are.”

The vice president receives monthly updates, a source familiar with Harris’ schedule said. Many times, the meetings consist of a progress review and strategic vision. But the next 48-hours and likely weeks ahead once Title 42 is lifted will test the credibility and efficacy of the vice president’s mission.

“The people who will be loudest, they’re playing politics,” said Dan Restrepo, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress and former senior Obama adviser who met with the vice president’s office on this issue.

Restrepo added, “They aren’t particularly interested in working the issue, they’re interested in the political benefits.”

Harris’ longterm plan

The vice president’s task, the first major issue assigned to her in March 2021, was billed as a longterm effort to develop a larger strategic partnership with Central American countries and stem the flow of migrants. At the time, an influx of unaccompanied minors apprehended on the US southern border were from Central America – a region where major hurricanes and the coronavirus pandemic took a devastating toll.

Since then, the number of border encounters from there have receded. In March 2021, border authorities encountered more than 85,000 migrants from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. During the same time period this year, the number dropped to around 34,000, according to US Customs and Border Protection data.

In the last two years, the vice president has launched two pillars of her long-term plan: a “Call to Action” to court businesses to invest in the region and an initiative dubbed “Central America Forward,” that focuses on good governance and labor rights.

Ensuring good governance has been the hardest part of Harris’ task due to the unfavorable conditions to foster democracy. In El Salvador, there’s been concern about limiting checks and balances in government, while in Guatemala, there have been concerns about government corruption. And in Honduras, the election of President Xiomara Castro has not brought radical change to corruption or organized crime once believed.

“Combatting corruption is a central pillar of our effort to address root causes of migration, and we will not waver in this,” a White House official told CNN. “But the existence of corruption has not prevented us from successfully tackling additional root causes of migration.”

In the absence of the environment to deepen diplomatic relationships, Harris has leaned hard into private sector investments. She’s courted millions from companies like Microsoft, Mastercard, Chobani, Duolingo, Nespresso, Bancolombia and Davivienda. Microsoft pledged to expand internet access to as many as 3 million people in the region by July 2022 and Chegg, an online-learning platform, has committed to certifying 100,000 young adult students in Honduras by 2030.

Experts credit Harris’ ability to secure private sector investments as her most visible action in the region to date. Still, those who have stake in the region question the durability of those investments over the long term without more diplomatic success in the region.

“If you’re trying to build these relationships with these corrupt actors and you’re just so focused on investment, investment, investment without requiring conditions to those countries, I think that’s problematic,” Ana María Méndez-Dardón, director for Central America at Washington Office on Latin America, told CNN.

Harris’ efforts alongside the Partnership for Central America are meant to lay down the economic groundwork now to reap major benefits for the people of Central America in the future. And the US government, they say, has stepped up their own abilities to match private investments. A White House official says the administration is on track to meet its commitment under the Root Causes Strategy to increase US foreign assistance to the region by providing $4 billion over four years.

But most, who support the vice president’s efforts, have cautioned that it’s likely too soon to see the real impact of those contributions in the region.

“I think we will only actually know if a strategy is working a few years down the road, because, again, this is a strategy that’s tackling long-term systemic issues,” Jason Marczak, senior director of the Atlantic Council’s Adrienne Arsht Latin America Center, told CNN.

So, the vice president will have twin challenges, experts and allies maintain. First is to progress in her Northern Triangle task and second, is to battle the perception that she is responsible for the border too, no matter how chaotic the situation becomes.

“The vice president’s big problem on this issue is that she’s wanted to own the investment side, but not the border strategy,” a source familiar with the vice president’s strategy told CNN. That makes her vulnerable, the source said, because, “she’s politically responsible for whatever happens.”

One group of students saw unexpected gains on the ‘Nation’s Report Card’ during the pandemic

Headlines were bleak when results from the test known as the “Nation’s Report Card” came out last year.

Local newspapers around the country documented their districts’ declining scores. Editorials warned that US schools had failed students during the pandemic. Officials described the exam as an alarming wake-up call.

But one result on the National Assessment of Educational Progress hasn’t gotten much attention – a score that caught even some experts by surprise.

Yes, scores across many age groups, subjects and geographies declined as Covid-19 shook the US education system – a troubling indicator of how many children were still struggling to bounce back after months of remote learning.

But one group saw an unexpected improvement: English learners in 8th grade saw their scores increase on the reading comprehension portion of the 2022 exam.

The shift was so notable that months after results were released it still stuck out to Grady Wilburn, a statistician and research scientist at the National Center for Education Statistics.

“This is a bright spot,” Wilburn said when presenting the data to reporters earlier this year as part of the National Press Foundation’s “Future of the American Child” fellowship.

In a round of testing where results were almost universally grim, the reading score from this group of 8th graders stands out.

"This is a bright spot. … English learners improving their performance from 2019 is actually one of the only improvements I can recall seeing in the results."

Grady Wilburn, National Center for Education Statistics

“English learners improving their performance from 2019 is actually one of the only improvements that I can recall seeing in the results,” Wilburn said.

Why did this group show some progress when so many other students stagnated or slipped? And what lessons can be learned from this as educators, parents and policymakers chart paths forward for the nation’s children?

What the scores reveal

The 2022 results were the first from the “Nation’s Report Card” since the coronavirus pandemic sent millions of children home from school in 2020 and into remote learning environments many weren’t prepared to handle.

Officials stress that the exam provides a snapshot of student performance and isn’t designed to definitively explain why changes in scores occurred.

Still, it’s surprising to see one group with increasing scores when others’ scores trended in the opposite direction – especially when the group that’s gaining ground is often described as underachieving.

Roughly 1 in 10 students in US public schools are considered English learners – the Department of Education’s designation for students whose first language isn’t English, including both immigrants and US-born students. And the number is growing.

There are more than 5 million English learners in US public schools, according to the latest estimates, and some of the country’s largest school districts say that population makes up at least 20% of their students.

Experts had warned that English learners were at risk of falling far behind as the pandemic put most students in front of screens instead of in classrooms. And recent research shows those concerns were well founded.

But the 2022 results from the “Nation’s Report Card” paint a more complicated picture.

English learners in 8th grade saw their average scores on the reading portion of the exam climb by four points.

That increase may not sound like much, and English learners’ scores were still well below those of their peers who were not English learners. But Wilburn told reporters that the change is worth exploring.

“This is an area that I would encourage others to dig into,” he said.

A spokesman for the Department of Education said in a recent statement to CNN that the bigger picture of the exam also is important to keep in mind.

“Seeing an increase in achievement for English Learners in 8th grade reading since 2019 is notable and demonstrates a resiliency throughout the COVID pandemic,” spokesman Roy Loewenstein said in a written statement. “However, overall, the National Assessment of Educational Progress results are a stark reminder of the impact that this pandemic has had on students across the country.”

So why would 8th-grade English learners see their reading scores improve? CNN asked national and local experts what they think could be behind this unexpected result.

Here are their theories:

Theory: Some high-performing students were deemed English learners longer than they normally would be

Some students who normally would have tested out of “English learner” status as their language skills improved didn’t during the pandemic, because less testing was conducted to change students’ placement during periods of remote learning.

“We know that many states had very limited assessment in 2020, or 2021 in some places. … That likely led to more students remaining in that (English learner) category,” says Karen Thompson, an associate professor at Oregon State University’s College of Education.

And that, Thompson says, could be one reason why 8th grade English learners’ reading scores were higher on this national exam, because higher-performing students were still included in the group.

That possibility relates to a “hidden” trend Thompson and other researchers have been pointing to for years: English learners actually end up doing much better in school than we think. But we don’t usually see that in test results because those former English learners are merged into the general student population.

A Boston Globe report last year noted that former English learners excelled on state standardized tests, and nearly half the valedictorians in that city’s public schools were former English learners.

Theory: Many districts are embracing new teaching strategies

Several experts and school district officials who spoke with CNN about the NAEP results pointed to changing norms in how English learners are taught. They touted a growing emphasis on bilingual education (instructing students both in English and their native language) and programs designed to see the value in students who come to school knowing another language.

In Albuquerque, New Mexico, where 8th grade English learners’ reading scores jumped by 12 points from 2019 to 2022, school officials say they believe there’s a clear correlation between the rising scores and the district’s education philosophies.

“We don’t look at learning a second language as a deficit,” Albuquerque Public Schools Associate Superintendent Antonio Gonzales says. “We celebrate it.”

The district offers bilingual seals on students’ transcripts signifying proficiency in two languages, and a growing number of students have received that recognition in recent years, says Richard Cisneros, the district’s interim senior director for language and cultural equity. Another factor that officials believe has helped English learners improve, Cisneros says, is a shift to using new culturally relevant textbooks that “students can see themselves in.”

Marcey Sorensen, chief academic officer of the Fort Worth Independent School District in Texas, says it’s possible the increasing scores of 8th grade English learners in her district, whose reading scores also climbed 12 points, were a result of recent efforts to overhaul the curriculum and change the way English learners there are taught.

When the district shifted to remote learning during the pandemic, she says, that put many students in home environments where they weren’t speaking English. But when students returned to the classroom in late 2020, Sorensen says, teachers intensified efforts to immerse English learners in bilingual language learning.

“We were ready to hit the ground with new materials, new strategies, new supports for tutoring and extended learning opportunities and new professional development for teachers,” she says. “We put a very strong emphasis on the listening, speaking, reading and writing every single day that they weren’t getting during the pandemic.”

And the improvements were dramatic, Sorensen says.

“It’s kind of like a desert, when you’re dry for six months, and then you get this infusion of bilingualism,” she says. “It’s like drinking from a firehose. You’re absorbing so fast.”

And as a result, Sorensen says bilingual students saw greater gains over the same time period than peers who spoke only one language.

Theory: In some districts, the results are part of a longer-term trend

There’s no doubt that the pandemic had a significant impact on schools and students. But some of the districts that saw jumps in this group’s performance had been observing score increases for years. And that’s an important point to consider, says Jorge Macias, chief of language and cultural education at Chicago Public Schools.

“It’s not a one-year wonder kind of thing,” he says, noting that English learners’ scores in his district have been climbing for more than a decade.

“I’m not surprised by the results. I think people are like, ‘Oh, you know, it’s an outlier.’ No, it’s not. You can see by the chart we’ve been improving, and we will continue to improve,” he says.

What’s been the secret to boosting scores there? Macias says years of improved teacher training has a lot to do with it.

“It was a cultural shift. It was a shift in getting more teachers, endorsed teachers in front of students,” he says.

Other efforts also played a role, Macias says, including increased tutoring options for English learners.

Theory: English learners weren’t taken out of classes as frequently

There’s also another theory some advocates have floated, according to Wilburn at the National Center for Education Statistics.

According to this hypothesis, the higher scores may have been an unintended consequence of pandemic teacher shortages. Due to staffing issues, English learners in some districts who normally would have been pulled out of classes for specialized instruction were left alongside their more fluent peers.

“What was happening previous to 2020 is that English learners would be in class, they would be removed from a class, whether it’d be reading or math, to have some special one-on-one focused English learner type of intervention. Given a lot of the shortages that schools were experiencing after Covid, that was happening less often,” Wilburn said during his January presentation.

And advocates who have long pushed for keeping English learners in the classroom rather than pulling them out are pointing to these test results as they continue to make their case.

Some experts caution against drawing conclusions from one year’s results

Experts who spoke with CNN say it’s impossible to pinpoint any one cause behind the changing scores, and that more research is needed.

“We need a lot more exploration to think about whether these kinds of hypotheses might be part of what’s happening, or if we shouldn’t dig too far into this because maybe it’s an anomaly,” Thompson says.

Julie Sugarman, a senior policy analyst at the nonpartisan Migration Policy Institute, says NAEP test scores don’t provide enough information to draw major conclusions.

“To make a grand statement about American education just on the basis of that test score, I don’t think that’s an appropriate use of that,” Sugarman says.

Asked about 8th grade English learners’ improving reading scores, Sugarman said the fact that the same students’ math scores didn’t increase gives her pause, as does the idea of extrapolating too much meaning from one year of results.

“If it’s just one year and it bounces up and down, it’s not a trend,” she says. “If it jumps up, or if it does that for two or three years in a row, that’s something that we want to look at. I wouldn’t say this is something that’s particularly real.”

Asked last year about the 8th grade English learners’ improvement, another longtime researcher also pointed out that test results often fluctuate from year to year.

“A lot of people who cheer the NAEP one year are downtrodden the next,” Tom Loveless told the education news site The 74.

It won’t be long before researchers analyzing the “Nation’s Report Card” will have new results to consider. Another round of exams will take place next year, and results from the 2022 US history and civics tests are scheduled to be released later this week.

Haitian family struggles to find a place to stay in Boston, as asylum-seekers sleep in a hospital lobby

Fleeing what she called the “dire condition” of life in Haiti, Dieuvena came to the US, hoping “she can at least get on her feet, find a job, and take care of her family.”

For Dieuvena, 28, that family includes her husband Banel, 28, and their 4-year-old son, Matéo Sebastien. She also has a 10-year-old daughter who lives in the Dominican Republic with the child’s father.

As she only speaks Haitian Creole and limited Spanish, Dieuvena spoke with CNN through Dr. Geralde Gabeau, the executive director for the Immigrant Family Services Institute. She asked to be referred to only by her first name, fearing she might be penalized by the US immigration system.

Passing from Haiti through Central America, the family arrived at the US-Mexico border where they attended a CBP One appointment, the process through which US Customs and Border Protection grants humanitarian parole. The family of three attended the appointment as a group with five other Haitian asylum-seekers. One of the other asylum-seekers suggested they go to Florida – but they quickly realized no one knew anyone there. Fortunately, one of the other five knew someone in Boston.

After a quick call confirming the connection, the CBP One parole officer marked all eight asylum-seekers as bound for Boston, they said.

The family crossed the border and headed to San Antonio on April 24.

One family among thousands

Dieuvena’s family is among thousands entering the US, as the government tries to process an increasing number of migrants.

Detention facilities along the US-Mexico border have surpassed capacity as a growing number of migrants cross into the United States leading up to the May 11 expiration of a Covid-era border restriction known as Title 42, according to a Department of Homeland Security official.

Officials have seen an uptick in migrants crossing the US-Mexico border in anticipation of the expiration of Title 42, which was invoked at the onset of the coronavirus pandemic and has allowed border authorities to quickly expel certain migrants. There have been around 7,000 daily encounters on the US southern border in recent days, a number expected to rise in the coming weeks.

A senior Customs and Border Protection official told CNN the agency estimates “several thousand” migrants are waiting in northern Mexico to cross the border.

No place to stay

Reaching San Antonio, Dieuvena, Banel and Matéo Sebastien slept at the airport, waiting for a flight to Boston, during which time the 4-year-old boy began complaining of a bellyache. After some hours, they were finally able to fly to the Northeast after someone generously paid for their airfare, she said. While one member of their group knew someone in Boston, Dieuvena said her family has neither friends nor family in the city.

Landing in Boston at 6 a.m., the group of eight went their separate ways, with the family of three heading straight for Boston Medical Center, where dozens of migrants arriving in the city have slept overnight in the lobby. The family spent the entire day at the hospital, where the boy was treated, Dieuvena said.

When they left the hospital, the family was sent to a Massachusetts Housing and Community Development site but were told there wasn’t enough space for them. CNN has reached out to the agency for comment.

Turned away, they returned to the hospital, by which time it was already close to midnight. Here, they again discovered there was no place for them to stay.

Fortunately, she still had the phone number of the Boston-based asylum-seeker who had encouraged them to migrate to Boston from San Antonio. The connection, hearing of Matéo Sebastien’s sickness, suggested they come to a three-bedroom residence in the city, already serving as lodging for a few other families.

Still, the man said they could only stay for two days.

Time running out

Arriving at the accommodation, Dieuvena said they found it to be overcrowded.

“Because they didn’t want her to go and be on the street with the baby,” Gabeau said of the family. “But there is no space where she lives, where she is right now, so, she has no choice (but) to find a place and she doesn’t know where.”

Waking in the morning, the family found the owner had gone off to work. Unfamiliar with the area, they were unable to return to the hospital. She said she’s been waiting to return because Matéo Sebastien was still sick.

“The person who gave her this little corner to sleep is not around,” Gabeau told CNN, “so she doesn’t know where to go, what to do because she doesn’t know the area. But the child is still sick.”

Today marks the family’s second and final night at the accommodation. Gabeau said they still haven’t secured housing for Sunday night. Dieuvena said if she doesn’t find anything by the end of the day Sunday, she doesn’t know what they’ll do.

Currently, her priority isn’t returning to the hospital despite Matéo Sebastien’s persisting bellyache but, rather, it’s finding a place where they can sleep off the streets. She would consider returning to the hospital if they can spend the night there, she said, but reemphasized they have neither family nor friends in the city, and don’t know the area.

Making matters more complicated, neither Dieuvena nor Banel is able to work given they both lack a work permit and must apply for one, they said.

Once asylum-seekers pass their CBP One application, Gabeau said, CBP tells individuals how long they have to make their case regarding why they should be allowed to remain in the US. Dieuvena and her family have been granted parole until 2026.

In the meantime, Dieuvena and Banel can apply for work authorization, Gabeau said. By Monday, Gabeau said the family will come to their offices at the Immigrant Family Services Institute where they’ll be assisted in filling out paperwork.

Between March and April alone, Gabeau said they’ve had more than 1,000 people come to their offices. Most of the time, depending on asylum-seekers’ occupations in Haiti, the paperwork goes through quickly. Some work as restaurant cooks, others in hospitality, and some are in construction, she said.

Dieuvena said in addition to her small family in Boston, she also has a 10-year-old daughter who currently lives in the Dominican Republic with the child’s father.

Anti-vaccine activist Robert F. Kennedy Jr. launches 2024 presidential bid

Robert F. Kennedy Jr., the anti-vaccine activist and environmental lawyer, described himself as a truth-teller who will “end the division” as he launched his bid for the 2024 Democratic presidential nomination on Wednesday in Boston.

Kennedy used his campaign launch speech to lambast school and business closures during the coronavirus pandemic and to insist that government and media “lie to us.”

“My mission over the next 18 months of this campaign and throughout my presidency,” he said, “will be to end the corrupt merger of state and corporate power that is threatening now – threatening now – to impose a new kind of corporate feudalism in our country; to commoditize our children, our purple mountain’s majesty; to poison our children and our people with chemicals and pharmaceutical drugs; to strip-mine our assets; to hollow out the middle class and keep us in a constant state of war.”

The 69-year-old Kennedy is the nephew of former President John F. Kennedy and son of former US attorney general and assassinated 1968 presidential candidate Robert Kennedy.

He joins self-help guru Marianne Williamson in a presidential primary that President Joe Biden is soon expected to enter as the overwhelming favorite.

One hurdle likely facing Kennedy as he attempts to win over Democratic voters: his own family. Some Kennedy family members have denounced his views on vaccines. He has also clashed with his mother and siblings over his support for the release of Sirhan Sirhan, the man who shot and killed his father in a moment that changed US history.

He acknowledged in his speech the opposition within his own family to his presidential bid.

“Other members of my family who are not here today – I’m going to make a confession because I know most American families, they never have any differences with each other,” he said. “So when that happens with a family, it’s really huge news, like everywhere.”

Still, he said he bears “no ill will or any kind of disappointment” toward family members who oppose his run.

He also pointed out a list of family members who he said were on hand Wednesday, including children, grandchildren, siblings and cousins.

“I told them to wear name tags,” he said of his children.

‘Heal the divide’

Kennedy made the announcement Wednesday in a ballroom of the Boston Park Plaza hotel, which was bathed in red, white and blue lights, before a backdrop of American flags, patriotic bunting and signs celebrating Kennedy 2024.

More than 500 people filled chairs, with a few hundred more standing in an overflow area, as signs were passed out to the crowd with a succinct campaign message: “Heal the divide.”

A brass band played as Kennedy family photographs played in a loop on large screens at the front of the room. Volunteers distributed Kennedy 2024 signs and bumper stickers.

Kennedy lives in Los Angeles, but he chose Boston as a nod to his family’s deep political roots in the city, even though his father, Robert F. Kennedy, declared his presidential ambitions in the Senate Caucus Room on Capitol Hill in 1968, the same place his uncle, John F. Kennedy, launched his presidential campaign in 1960.

He’s hardly the first Kennedy to take on a sitting Democratic president. Another uncle, Sen. Edward Kennedy, challenged Jimmy Carter for the party’s nomination in 1980 and lost decisively in a bitter campaign that divided the party for years to come.

For more than six decades, the reverence to the Kennedy name remains unparalleled in American politics, but the presidential announcement on Wednesday was met with resistance from some admirers of the family.

“I’m a lifelong Democrat, but I will not be voting for Robert Kennedy Jr. because I cannot stomach the anti-vaccine thing,” said Tyson Humble of Portland, Oregon, who was visiting the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. “The Kennedy name isn’t enough. If he’s going to go around saying crazy stuff like that, it’s kind of a distraction more than anything.”

Others acknowledged they didn’t know much about Kennedy’s environmental activism or controversial stance on vaccines.

“I’m willing to listen to what a person has to say, but I see no reason to displace Joe Biden,” said Bob Howland, who was visiting the Kennedy library from Pittsburgh.

Tricia Santi, who took the train from Maine to attend the announcement, said she’s a longtime admirer of the Kennedy family and a strong supporter of his message against government mandates for vaccinations. But she said his presidential candidacy excited her for other reasons, including shining a brighter spotlight on his environmental activism.

“I’ve been following him for many years with his advocacy work,” Santi said. “I think he would make an excellent candidate to bring the country together to tell the truth about everything.”

She knows his views on vaccinations are controversial, but she called him “a choice candidate” who favors personal autonomy.

Judy McIntyre stood in the ballroom, wearing a Kennedy button and a white T-shirt saying “question everything.” She said she hoped his presidential campaign would draw more attention to not only vaccination mandates, but also other progressive positions.

“Don’t fall for the one-subject anti-vax thing,” McIntyre said. “Keep an open mind, listen to him, listen to his message. He’s been cleaning up the environment for years.”

A Boston native and long admirer of the Kennedy family, McIntyre said she was not bothered by the criticism from his family.

“I put nobody on a pedestal, but I really believe in his message,” McIntyre said. “I come from a big Irish family, too. Everybody is entitled to how they feel. Agree to disagree – that’s what you have to do.”

Longtime vaccine skeptic and environmental activist

Kennedy is a longtime vaccine skeptic. He has promoted discredited claims linking vaccines and autism and founded the anti-vaccine organization Children’s Health Defense.

In 2019, three members of his family – his sister Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, brother Joseph P. Kennedy II and niece Maeve Kennedy McKean – forcefully denounced his anti-vaccine views in a Politico Magazine op-ed, arguing that he was “part of a misinformation campaign that’s having heartbreaking – and deadly – consequences.”

Kennedy was a strident critic of the government’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic and its top infectious disease expert, Anthony Fauci. He also railed against the coronavirus vaccine and vaccine mandates.

In 2022, Kennedy invoked Nazi Germany in an anti-vaccine speech at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, DC. The previous year, Instagram took down his account “for repeatedly sharing debunked claims about the coronavirus or vaccines.”

Kennedy is the latest in a long line of family members to seek to enter politics.

His sister Kathleen served as the lieutenant governor of Maryland from 1995 to 2003. His brother Joseph was a congressman from Massachusetts from 1987 to 1999. And more recently, his brother Chris Kennedy was an unsuccessful candidate for governor of Illinois in 2018.

The last Kennedy to hold elected office was his nephew former Massachusetts Rep. Joe Kennedy III, who lost a Democratic Senate primary in 2020. (He is now the US special envoy for Northern Ireland.) Caroline Kennedy, the daughter of former President Kennedy, is currently the US ambassador to Australia.

The 2024 Democratic presidential primary is only beginning to take shape. Williamson launched her second long-shot campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination last month. CNN previously reported that Biden has told several elected officials in private conversations that he is “definitely running” for reelection but some Democratic officials have said a formal announcement is more likely to come this summer.

On the Republican side, former President Donald Trump jump-started the race for the party nomination, announcing his third bid for the White House last year. Former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley, former Arkansas Gov. Asa Hutchinson and tech entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy are also in the race, while South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott launched an exploratory committee earlier this month. Other high-profile Republicans said to be weighing bids include Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis and former Vice President Mike Pence.

This investor can spot market bubbles. Now he’s warning of an ‘ominous’ bust

Jeremy Grantham made his name predicting the dot-com crash in 2000 and the financial crisis in 2008. Now, the famous investor warns another epic bubble in financial markets is bursting — and the turmoil that swept through the banking sector last month is just the beginning.

“Other things will break, and who knows what they will be,” Grantham told CNN in an exclusive interview. “We’re by no means finished with the stress to the financial system.”

The co-founder of investment firm GMO is known for his bearish views. A frenzy in multiple US markets spurred by rock-bottom interest rates after the coronavirus pandemic led Grantham to call “one of the great bubbles of financial history” back in 2021.

Since early 2022, when the S&P 500 hit an all-time high, US stocks have dropped about 15% as central banks have jacked up borrowing costs. But Grantham sees much steeper declines on the horizon.

The “best we can hope for,” he said, is a fall of about 27% from current levels, while the worst-case scenario would see a plunge of more than 50%. The low point might not arrive until “deep into next year,” he added.

Analysts at Bank of America and Goldman Sachs, for their part, see the S&P 500 finishing 2023 only about 2% below Wednesday’s close. Morgan Stanley foresees a drop of nearly 5%.

Another Silicon Valley Bank?

Stocks aren’t the only assets that notched excessive valuations when cheap money encouraged investors to take big risks. The prices of government bonds, real estate and even cryptocurrencies also shot up.

This widespread exuberance could lead to a particularly harsh reckoning, according to Grantham. The recent failure of Silicon Valley Bank, for example, was triggered in part by losses on its bond holdings as interest rates jumped and prices of US government debt fell.

As the bubble deflates, it’s all but certain to result in an economic downturn, he predicted.

“Every one of these great bursts of euphoria, the great bubbles with overpriced markets … has been followed by a recession,” Grantham said. “The recessions are mild if everybody does everything right and there [are] no complications. They are terrible if people get everything wrong.”

In the meantime, investors should “count on being surprised,” Grantham said.

It would have been difficult to predict the implosion of Silicon Valley Bank, or the need for the Swiss government to swoop in and orchestrate an emergency rescue of Credit Suisse, he explained.

“When the great bubbles break, they do impose a lot of stress on the system,” Grantham said. “It’s like pressure behind a dam. It’s very hard to know which part will go.”

The correction in the bond market may be almost complete, Grantham forecast. But stock valuations remain “way above any long-term traditional relationship” to corporate performance.

Strain in the financial system could therefore grow when, as he expects, the US economy enters a recession and corporate earnings begin to take a hit. Economists at the Federal Reserve are predicting a mild recession in late 2023 because of fallout from the banking crisis.

Even in this environment, though, there will be opportunities to make money. (GMO has a US equity fund, with holdings in companies such as Apple (AAPL), Microsoft (MSFT), ExxonMobil (XOM) and Kroger (KR).) But in the short term, “almost everybody gets hurt” as asset prices come back down to Earth, Grantham said.

Ghosts of crises past

Grantham sees uncomfortable parallels between markets today and 2000, when an explosion in the price of tech stocks was followed by a dizzying crash. There are also echoes of 2008, when a painful comedown in the US housing market almost broke the banking system.

What’s even more worrying is that this time, bubbles in the stock market and the real estate market are poised to burst simultaneously, Grantham said.

That’s what happened in Japan in the early 1990s, unleashing a long period of economic stagnation that haunts the world’s third-largest economy to this day.

“They have had basically a lost 20 years, and in addition a fairly lame 10 years,” Grantham said.

He added: “The occasions where people have tried to break a bubble in the stock market and the real estate market together are fairly ominous.”

Fears about the health of the US commercial real estate industry have grown in recent weeks. The sector, which relies heavily on debt financing, has been hit hard by rising interest rates. The popularity of remote work has been particularly difficult for offices, a market Grantham quipped was in “ragged disarray.”

Meanwhile, US home prices, which hit record highs in 2022, have also started to drop as mortgage rates have leaped.

What’s the way out?

Grantham blamed central bankers for the emergence of the latest market bubble in the United States. They pursued policies in recent decades that artificially drove up the value of financial assets, setting the stage for crashes, he said.

Every Federal Reserve chair since Alan Greenspan, who led the US central bank from 1987 to 2006, “has followed the same policy that lower rates are good for you,” he said. “What has it delivered? It’s delivered a series of great bubbles that then break and inflict a lot of pain.”

Jerome Powell, the current Fed chair, would be wise to follow the example of Greenspan’s predecessor, Paul Volcker, according to Grantham.

Volcker raised interest rates to unprecedented levels to fight inflation in the late 1970s and early 1980s. He succeeded in curbing price rises, though his policies also led to a series of recessions.

“If Powell could just channel a little bit of Volcker, that would be a distinct improvement,” Grantham said, suggesting that the Fed needs to stay the course on its rate hikes instead of buckling prematurely.

Consumer inflation in the United States eased to 5% in March, the lowest annual rate since May 2021. That has boosted speculation among investors that the Fed could soon stop raising borrowing costs.

But longer-term trends could prop up inflation for years to come, Grantham said.

Climate change is resulting in extreme weather and more intense and frequent natural disasters. That will disrupt the supply of commodities and raise food prices. Aging populations also pose a risk as smaller workforces command higher wages.

“These are not mild influences,” Grantham said. “These are very clear and important.”

Democratic senators want to ban stock trading in Congress

Last year, the S&P 500 fell 18%, but you wouldn’t know it from looking at the portfolios of US lawmakers.

Overall holdings by members of the US Congress outperformed the S&P 500 by about 17.5% on average in 2022, according to Subversive Capital, a company that creates ETFs which track stock trading by senators and representatives.

Some Democratic Senators think that divergence could have an unethical slant to it. In response, they’ve announced a new bill, The Ending Trading and Holdings in Congressional Stocks (ETHICS) Act, that would prohibit all members of Congress and their family members from buying or selling individual stocks.

The act is the product of a working group formed by Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer more than a year ago to address reports of rampant insider trading amongst lawmakers.

Multiple news outlets reported that numerous members of Congress had violated the Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge (STOCK) Act, which prohibits the use of non-public information for private profit, including insider trading by members of Congress and other government employees.

Several members of Congress were also scrutinized for their financial transactions during the early days of the coronavirus pandemic, when they received closed-door briefings that warned of an impending financial crash.

The ETHICS Act would not only ban lawmakers, their spouses and dependent children from trading single stocks, it would also create a searchable, electronic database of their holdings and impose large penalties for any violations.

Before the Bell spoke with Sen. Jeff Merkley, the lead sponsor of the Senate bill.

This interview has been edited for length and clarity.

Before the Bell: What does this bill do? Who can trade and under what parameters?

Sen. Jeff Merkley: I’ve been trying to push this notion that there are deep conflicts created by members [of Congress] trading stocks, and they’re significant enough that they both produce corruption and they certainly produce the impression among the public of corruption. For both reasons that stock trading needs to end.

There’s two forms of corruption. One is that having a portfolio of individual stocks concentrated in a particular area changes a member’s view of how they would write legislation that might include breaks for that particular industry that would drive the value of their stock. It might change how they would vote on legislation.

And then there’s the second aspect, which is that members have access to often confidential information and briefings that precedes actions by the [Biden] administration, or what bills are going to be coming to the floor. That is information that the public doesn’t have. The result is members tend to do better than the general public and better than the S&P 500. There’s an unfair advantage for [lawmakers], you could tackle that by just ending the trading of individual stocks.

Have you witnessed anything in the Senate or among lawmakers that makes you think unethical trading is taking place?

I can tell you this, in the course of both the briefings here on the Hill and in fundraising that members do, including myself, you will hear people say, ‘hey, six months from now we’re planning to launch product XYZ.’ And you kind of walk away from that going ‘I’m so glad I’m not trading individual stocks, because it would be wrong for me to have that information that the public doesn’t have.’

How would this bill actually enforce these new rules?

I’ll start with really expensive penalties that will scare people a lot. If you’re in violation of the selling, buying or holding provisions of this law in any given month, the penalty is a month’s salary, or 10% of the amount of stocks that were traded or held. And that is a huge amount.

If this bill were to pass, would some members forego reelection?

The provision for lawmakers buying stock goes into effect immediately. The provision for not selling goes into effect after 90 days, so they can sell their portfolio.

The place where it affects reelection is the spouse and children. The conversation among members was that in this modern age, spouses have their own lives and their own habits. And while it’s fair to change the rules right away for us, it’s not fair to do that to spouses, so the rules would only be applied to them after reelection. I think there’s just a widespread sense that this bill has to apply to spouses and minor children.

A version of this bill was released and didn’t pass. What makes this different when other efforts have previously stalled?

This is a product of intense conversations throughout our caucus and with everyone in the caucus who produced a bill last time, and of conversations with a whole bunch of Republicans that we strived to work with. Sen. Elizabeth Warren had conversations with Sen. Lindsey Graham and Sen. Steve Daines of Montana.

This is the most comprehensive bill to come out of all those discussions. It has by far the largest number of sponsors in the Senate, 21, that any bill has had to date.

Would you consider a bill that applies the same restrictions to the Supreme Court?

There is a huge appetite for ethics reform for the Supreme Court. There was a sense among members that we need to get our own house in order. Show what it looks like and then take the principles we learn to extend to the judiciary and the executive branch.

And you know, many of us would like to write them in now, but anything you do that makes the bill more complicated now makes it less likely we ever get the bill passed. So, on balance it seemed like the more responsible thing to do was to say ‘let’s prove we can get our own house in order before we start lecturing other branches of the government.’

Goodbye, Bed Bath & Beyond

Bed Bath & Beyond officially filed for bankruptcy on Sunday.

“Thank you to all of our loyal customers. We have made the difficult decision to begin winding down our operations,” a statement at the top of the company’s website said Sunday morning.

The news was expected, as the store had been struggling to stay afloat for months. But what comes next is still unclear.

The company’s 360 Bed Bath & Beyond locations, along with its 120 buybuy BABY stores, will remain open for now, reports my colleague Nathaniel Meyersohn. Websites will also remain active and the company secured a $240 million loan to help fund its operations during bankruptcy.

But store closing sales will begin Wednesday, and Bed Bath & Beyond will close some stores. Just how many – or what happens to its 14,000 employees — depends on what happens next.

Here’s the thing: A bankruptcy filing does not necessarily mean that a company is going out of business. Many major US companies have filed for bankruptcy, using it to shed debt and other costs they could no longer afford. But even if Bed Bath and Beyond does emerge from bankruptcy, its future is not guaranteed.

The company said it would seek to sell some or all of its business. If it’s able to find a buyer, Bed Bath & Beyond will halt store closings. But if a buyer doesn’t come forward, Bed Bath & Beyond will likely be liquidated entirely and go out of business.

A new approach to a Covid-19 nasal vaccine shows early promise

Scientists in Germany say they’ve been able to make a nasal vaccine that can shut down a Covid-19 infection in the nose and throat, where the virus gets its first foothold in the body.

In experiments in hamsters, two doses of the vaccine – which is made with a live but weakened form of the coronavirus that causes Covid-19 – blocked the virus from copying itself in the animals’ upper airways, achieving “sterilizing immunity” and preventing illness, a long-sought goal of the pandemic.

Although this vaccine has several more hurdles to clear before it gets to a doctor’s office or drug store, other nasal vaccines are in use or are nearing the finish line in clinical trials.

China and India both rolled out vaccines given through the nasal tissues last fall, though it’s not clear how well they may be working. Studies on the effectiveness of these vaccines have yet to be published, leaving much of the world to wonder whether this approach to protection really works in people.

Halting progress on next-generation Covid-19 vaccines

The US has reached something of a stalemate with Covid-19. Even with the darkest days of the pandemic behind us, hundreds of Americans are still dying daily as the infection continues to simmer in the background of our return to normal life.

As long as the virus continues to spread among people and animals, there’s always the potential for it mutate into a more contagious or more damaging version of itself. And while Covid infections have become manageable for most healthy people, they may still pose a danger to vulnerable groups such as the elderly and immunocompromised.

Researchers hope next-generation Covid-19 vaccines, which aim to shut down the virus before it ever gets a chance to make us sick and ultimately prevent the spread of infection, could make our newest resident respiratory infection less of a threat.

One way scientists are trying to do that is by boosting mucosal immunity, beefing up immune defenses in the tissues that line the upper airways, right where the virus would land and begin to infect our cells.

It’s a bit like stationing firefighters underneath the smoke alarm in your house, says study author Emanuel Wyler, a scientist at the Max Delbruck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association in Berlin.

The immunity that’s created by shots works throughout the body, but it resides primarily in the blood. That means it may take longer to mount a response.

“If they are already on site, they can immediately eliminate the fire, but if they’re like 2 miles away, they first need to drive there, and by that time, one-third of the house is already in full flames,” Wyler said.

Mucosal vaccines are also better at priming a different kind of first responder than injections do. They do a better job of summoning IgA antibodies, which have four arms to grab onto invaders instead of the two arms that the y-shaped IgG antibodies have. Some scientists think IgA antibodies may be less picky about their targets than IgG antibodies, which makes them better equipped to deal with new variants.

The new nasal vaccine takes a new approach to a very old idea: weakening a virus so it’s no longer a threat and then giving it to people so their immune systems can learn to recognize and fight it off. The first vaccines using this approach date to the 1870s, against anthrax and rabies. Back then, scientists weakened the agents they were using with heat and chemicals.

The researchers manipulated the genetic material in the virus to make it harder for cells to translate. This technique, called codon pair deoptimization, hobbles the virus so it can be shown to the immune system without making the body sick.

“You could imagine reading a text … and every letter is a different font, or every letter is a different size, then the text is much harder to read. And this is basically what we do in codon pair deoptimization,” Wyler said.

Promising results in animal studies

In the hamster studies, which were published Monday in the journal Nature Microbiology, two doses of the live but weakened nasal vaccine created a much stronger immune response than either two doses of an mRNA-based vaccine or one that uses an adenovirus to ferry the vaccine instructions into cells.

The researchers think the live weakened vaccine probably worked better because it closely mimics the process of a natural infection.

The nasal vaccine also previews the entire coronavirus for the body, not just its spike proteins like current Covid-19 vaccines do, so the hamsters were able to make immune weapons against a wider range of targets.

As promising as all this sounds, vaccine experts say caution is warranted. This vaccine still has to pass more tests before it’s ready for use, but they say the results look encouraging.

“They did a very nice job. This is obviously a competent and thoughtful team that did this work, and impressive in the scope of what they did. Now it just needs to be repeated,” perhaps in primates and certainly in humans before it can be widely used, said Dr. Greg Poland, who designs vaccines at the Mayo Clinic. He was not involved in the new research.

The study began in 2021, before the Omicron variant was around, so the vaccine tested in these experiments was made with the original strain of the coronavirus. In the experiments, when they infected animals with Omicron, the live but weakened nasal vaccine still performed better than the others, but its ability to neutralize the virus was diminished. Researchers think it will need an update.

It also needs to be tested in humans, and Wyler says they’re working on that. The scientists have partnered with a Swiss company called RocketVax to start phase I clinical trials.

Other vaccines are further along, but the progress has been “slow and halting,” Poland said. Groups working on these vaccines are struggling to raise the steep costs of getting a new vaccine to market, and they’re doing it in a setting where people tend to think the vaccine race has been won and done.

In reality, Poland said, we’re far from that. All it would take is another Omicron-level shift in the evolution of the virus, and we could be back at square one, with no effective tools against the coronavirus.

“That’s foolish. We should be developing a pan-coronavirus vaccine that does induce mucosal immunity and that is long-lived,” he said.

More on the way

At least four nasal vaccines for Covid-19 have reached late-stage testing in people, according to the World Health Organization’s vaccine tracker.

The nasal vaccines in use in China and India rely on harmless adenoviruses to ferry their instructions into cells, although effectiveness data for these has not been published.

Two other nasal vaccines are finishing human studies.

One, a recombinant vaccine that can be produced cheaply in chicken eggs, the same way many flu vaccines are, is being put through its paces by researchers at Mount Sinai in New York City.

Another, like the German vaccine, uses a live but weakened version of the virus. It’s being developed by a company called Codagenix. Results of those studies, which were carried out in South America and Africa, may come later this year.

The German team says it’s eagerly watching for the Codagenix data.

“They will be very important in order to know where whether this kind of attempt is basically promising or not,” Wyler said.

They have reason to worry. Respiratory infections have proved to be tough targets for inhaled vaccines.

FluMist, a live but weakened form of the flu virus, works reasonably well in children but doesn’t help adults as much. The reason is thought to be that adults already have immune memory for the flu, and when the virus is injected into the nose, the vaccine mostly boosts what’s already there.

Still, some of the most potent vaccines such as the vaccine against measles, mumps and rubella use live attenuated viruses, so it’s a promising approach.

Another consideration is that live vaccines can’t be taken by everyone. People with very compromised immunity are often cautioned against using live vaccines because even these very weakened viruses may be risky for them.

“Although it’s strongly attenuated, it’s still a real virus,” Wyler said, so it would have to be used carefully. 

China is turning its anti-corruption fire on banks at a risky time for the economy

China’s banks and insurers have become the latest focus of a sweeping anti-corruption crackdown that is ensnaring top officials and risks rattling the already fragile nerves of investors and entrepreneurs.

The Communist Party’s top anti-graft agency, the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (CCDI), has investigated more than a dozen senior executives at the country’s most important financial institutions so far this year, according to a CNN analysis of statements posted on the CCDI’s website.

Three big names at the very top of China’s financial system have been probed or charged, according to the CCDI, including Li Xiaopeng, the former chairman of China Everbright Group — one of the country’s oldest and largest state-owned financial conglomerates.

Li is suspected of “serious violations of law and discipline” and is under investigation, the commission said Wednesday in a brief statement.

Everbright said in a statement that it “fully supports” the party’s decision and will “fully cooperate” with the investigation into Li, who chaired the bank for four years until he resigned in March 2022.

Last Friday, authorities opened a similar probe into Liu Liange, former chairman of state-owned Bank of China, the country’s fourth largest lender. Liu resigned last month citing “work adjustments,” according to a filing by the bank.

And in January, Wang Bin, who headed state-owned China Life Insurance from 2018 to early 2022, was charged by national prosecutors with taking bribes and hiding overseas savings. He was first probed by the CCDI in January 2022.

Analysts say the dragnet may have also implicated Bao Fan, a star investment banker and noted name in the tech sector, who went missing in February.

It appears the crackdown may intensify, they say.

Last week, the CCDI announced it would inspect more than 30 major state-owned firms. They include financial giants such as China Investment Corp, the nation’s sovereign wealth fund, China Development Bank, which provides financing for key government projects, and Agricultural Bank of China, another large state-controlled lender.

It comes just months after Xi Jinping secured a historic third term in October as China’s leader and stacked his top team with his Communist Party loyalists. Soon after he moved to consolidate the party’s hold over the economy.

“The current financial crackdown is a new wave of Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign against the financial sector for consolidation of his power,” said Chongyi Feng, an associate professor in China Studies at the University of Technology Sydney.

The anti-corruption crackdown is Xi’s signature campaign. It has swept across the ruling Communist Party, the government, the military and state-owned companies in waves since 2012, when Xi took office. Millions of officials have been punished.

‘Complete control’

This year, the crackdown has focused on the country’s sprawling financial industry. Feng said there may be two reasons for this “escalation.”

“The finance [industry] is the last of the three key areas for Xi to assert complete control after the military and the [internal] security apparatus,” Feng said, adding that it is the “money bags” of the party.

Xi also needs to centralize control over the sector in order to deal with “the deepening economic and financial crisis in China” and to prepare for a “financial war” with the United States, he added.

Beijing is contending with an array of domestic and global challenges. The housing market is suffering its worst downturn on record. Youth unemployment remains high. Local governments are struggling with huge debt loads and cutting benefits.

And relations between the United States and China are at their lowest point in decades, leading to escalating tensions in technology and investment.

Investing in China has become increasingly precarious as the climate for private business has deteriorated, and foreign companies have been caught in the crossfires of geopolitical tension.

As the economy tries to recover, Beijing is under pressure to revive growth and create jobs for millions. Top economic officials have been trying to lift business confidence by reassuring private industry and rolling out the welcome wagon for global CEOs.

But the deepening crackdown on the vast financial sector could rattle investors. China’s banks and insurers have assets worth $60 trillion, equivalent to 340% of the country’s annual GDP, according to the most recent statistics from the People’s Bank of China.

Conflicting goals?

The disappearance of Bao, founder and CEO of China Renaissance, triggered a plunge in the value of the bank’s stock. It has lost 27% since mid-February.

China’s tech sector, meanwhile, is still nursing the bruises of its own run-in with Xi’s ruling Communist Party, which wiped out hundreds of billions of dollars in market value. Shares of Alibaba are still down nearly 70% from their peak in late October in 2020.

“Xi’s recent crackdown could hurt business sentiment among both domestic and foreign investors, many of whom are already nervous about the political environment,” said Neil Thomas, fellow on Chinese politics at the Asia Society Policy Institute’s Center for China Analysis.

“Xi wants to both revive the Chinese economy and enhance the party’s leadership of private business. These goals are not mutually exclusive, but the latter is likely to constrain the former.”

In 2017, the party launched a sweeping crackdown on risky lending by banks and shadow-lending institutions over concerns about systemic risks. Authorities tried to rein in the country’s largest private conglomerates, such as Anbang, HNA, Wanda and Fosun Group, which had borrowed heavily to fuel aggressive global expansion.

The latest crackdown on banks and financial firms was reinforced in February by the anti-graft watchdog.

“It is necessary to punish harder … corruption in areas such as finance, state-owned enterprises, and grain purchases and sales, where power is concentrated, capital is intensive, and resources are rich,” the CCDI said in a strongly worded commentary on its website.

Bankers must abandon their pretensions of being the “financial elite” and stop copying “Western ways,” it added.

The article was published just days after Bao, the investment banker, was reported missing by his firm.

Xi “likely sees targeting high-level industry figures such as Bao Fan as an effective strategy to shock the entire financial sector into stronger and more proactive compliance with political dictates,” Thomas added.

Bao was the latest high-profile tycoon to disappear. China Renaissance said in late February that Bao was “cooperating in an investigation” by certain authorities in the country. It gave no other details.

In 2020, real estate tycoon Ren Zhiqiang went missing for several months after he allegedly spoke out against Xi’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. Ren was eventually jailed for 18 years on corruption charges.

In 2017, insurance giant Anbang warned shareholders that its chairman, Wu Xiaohui, wouldn’t be able to carry out his duties after he was reportedly detained by authorities as part of a government investigation. Anbang at the time cited “personal reasons” for his absence. Wu was eventually jailed for 18 years.